Speech on Commercial Discrimination
James Madison
January 3, 1794
Congressional Speech, House of Representatives

Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, Vol. 6 (1790-1802)

---

SPEECH ON DISCRIMINATING DUTIES — JANUARY 3, 1794

Mr. Madison, after some general observations on the Report [of the Secretary of State
on commerce], entered into a more particular consideration of the subject. He
remarked, that the commerce of the United States is not, at this day, on that
respectable footing to which, from its nature and importance, it is entitled. He
recurred to its situation previous to the adoption of the Constitution, when conflicting
systems prevailed in the different States. The then existing state of things gave rise to
that Convention of Delegates from the different parts of the Union, who met to
deliberate on some general principles for the regulation of commerce, which might be
conducive, in their operation, to the general welfare, and that such measures should be
adopted as would conciliate the friendship and good faith of those countries who were
disposed to enter into the nearest commercial connexions with us. But what has been
the result of the system which has been pursued ever since? What is the present
situation of our commerce? From the situation in which we find ourselves after four
years’ experiment, he observed, that it appeared incumbent on the United States to see
whether they could not now take measures promotive of those objects for which the
Government was in a great degree instituted. Measures of moderation, firmness, and
decision, he was persuaded, were now necessary to be adopted, in order to narrow the
sphere of our commerce with those nations who see proper not to meet us on terms of
reciprocity.

Mr. M. then read the following resolutions:

“Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That the interest of the United States
would be promoted by further restrictions and higher duties, in certain cases, on the
manufactures and navigation of foreign nations employed in the commerce of the
United States, than those now imposed.

“1. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That an additional duty ought to be
laid on the following articles, manufactured by European nations having no
commercial treaty with the United States: On all articles of which leather is the
material of chief value, an additional duty of — per centum ad valorem; on all
manufactured iron, steel, tin, pewter, copper, brass, or articles of which either of these
metals is the material of chief value, an additional duty of — per centum ad valorem;
on all articles of which cotton is the material of chief value, an additional duty of —
per centum ad valorem; on all cloths of which wool is the material of chief value,
where the estimated value on which the duty is payable, is above —, an additional
duty of — per centum ad valorem; where such value is below —, an additional duty
of — per centum ad valorem; on all cloths of which hemp or flax is the material of
chief value, and of which the estimated value on which the duty is payable is below
—, an additional duty of — per centum ad valorem; on all manufactures of which silk
is the material of chief value, an additional duty of — per centum ad valorem.


“2. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That an additional duty of — per ton,
ought to be laid on the vessels belonging to the nations having no commercial treaty
with the United States.

“3. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That the duty on vessels belonging to
the nations having commercial treaties with the United States, ought to be reduced to
— per ton.

“4. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That where any nation may refuse to
consider as vessels of the United States, any vessels not built within the United States,
the foreign built vessels of such nation ought to be subjected to a like refusal, unless
built within the United States.

“5. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That, where any nation may refuse to
admit the produce or manufactures of the United States, unless in vessels belonging to
the United States, or to admit them in vessels of the United States, if last imported
from any place not within the United States, a like restriction ought, after the — day
of —, to be extended to the produce and manufactures of such nation, and that, in the
mean time, a duty of — per ton extraordinary ought to be imposed on vessels so
importing any such produce or manufacture.

“6. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That, where any nation may refuse to
the vessels of the United States a carriage of the produce or manufactures thereof,
whilst such produce or manufactures are admitted by it in its own vessels it would be
just to make the restriction reciprocal; but, inasmuch as such a measure, if suddenly
adopted, might be particularly distressing in cases which merit the benevolent
attention of the United States, it is expedient, for the present, that a tonnage
extraordinary only of —, be imposed on the vessels so employed; and that all distilled
spirits imported therein shall be subject to an additional duty of one — part of the
existing duty.

“7. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That provision ought to be made for
liquidating and ascertaining the losses sustained by citizens of the United States, from
the operation of particular regulations of any country contravening the Law of
Nations, and that such losses be reimbursed, in the first instance, out of the additional
duties on the manufactures, productions, and vessels of the nation establishing such
unlawful regulations.”

Mr. M. took a general view of the probable effects which the adoption of something
like the resolutions he had proposed, would produce. They would produce, respecting
many articles imported, a competition which would enable countries who do not now
supply us with those articles, to do it, and would increase the encouragement on such
as we can produce within ourselves. We should also obtain an equitable share in
carrying our own produce; we should enter into the field of competition on equal
terms, and enjoy the actual benefit of advantages which nature and the spirit of our
people entitle us to.


He adverted to the advantageous situation this country is entitled to stand in,
considering the nature of our exports and returns. Our exports are bulky, and therefore
must employ much shipping, which might be nearly all our own: our exports are
chiefly necessaries of life, or raw materials, the food for the manufacturers of other
nations. On the contrary, the chief of what we receive from other countries, we can
either do without, or produce substitutes.

It is in the power of the United States, he conceived, by exerting her natural rights,
without violating the rights, or even the equitable pretensions of other nations—by
doing no more than most nations do for the protection of their interests, and much less
than some, to make her interests respected; for, what we receive from other nations
are but luxuries to us which, if we choose to throw aside, we could deprive part of the
manufacturers of those luxuries, of even bread, if we are forced, to the contest of self-
denial. This being the case, our country may make her enemies feel the extent of her
power. We stand, with respect to the nation exporting those luxuries, in the relation of
an opulent individual to the laborer, in producing the superfluities for his
accommodation; the former can do without those luxuries, the consumption of which
gives bread to the latter

He did not propose, or wish that the United States should, at present, go so far in the
line which his resolutions point to, as they might go. The extent to which the
principles involved in those resolutions should be carried, will depend upon filling up
the blanks. To go to the very extent of the principle immediately, might be
inconvenient. He wished, only, that the Legislature should mark out the ground on
which we think we can stand; perhaps it may produce the effect wished for, without
unnecessary irritation; we need not at first go every length.

Another consideration would induce him, he said, to be moderate in filling up the
blanks—not to wound public credit. He did not wish to risk any sensible diminution
of the public revenue. He believed that if the blanks were filled with judgment, the
diminution of the revenue, from a diminution in the quantity of imports, would be
counterbalanced by the increase in the duties.

The last resolution he had proposed, he said, is, in a manner, distinct from the rest.
The nation is bound by the most sacred obligation, he conceived, to protect the rights
of its citizens against a violation of them from any quarter; or, if they cannot protect,
they are bound to repay the damage.

It is a fact authenticated to this House by communications from the Executive, that
there are regulations established by some European nations, contrary to the Law of
Nations, by which our property is seized and disposed of in such a way that damages
have accrued. We are bound either to obtain reparation for the injustice, or
compensate the damage. It is only in the first instance, no doubt, that the burden is to
be thrown upon the United States. The proper Department of Government will, no
doubt, take proper steps to obtain redress. The justice of foreign nations will certainly
not permit them to deny reparation when the breach of the Law of Nations appear
evidently; at any rate, it is just that the individual should not suffer. He believed the


amount of the damages that would come within the meaning of this resolution, would
not be very considerable.