Speeches on Commercial Discrimination (Duties on Imports)
James Madison
House of Representatives, April 9 and April 21, 1789
Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, vol. 5
       (via Online Library of Liberty, Liberty Fund)

---

APRIL 9. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.
From what has been suggested by the gentlemen that have spoken on the subject
before us, I am led to apprehend we shall be under the necessity of travelling further
into an investigation of principles than what I supposed would be necessary, or had in
contemplation when I offered the propositions before you.
It was my view to restrain the first essay on this subject principally to the object of
revenue, and make this rather a temporary expedient than any thing permanent.2 I see,
however, that there are strong exceptions against deciding immediately on a part of
the plan, which I had the honor to bring forward, as well as against an application to
the resources mentioned in the list of articles just proposed by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania. (Mr. Hartley.)
I presume, that, however much we may be disposed to promote domestic
manufactures, we ought to pay some regard to the present policy of obtaining
revenue. It may be remarked also, that by fixing on a temporary expedient for this
purpose, we may gain more than we shall lose by suspending the consideration of the
other subject until we obtain fuller information of the state of our manufactures. We
have at this time the strongest motives for turning our attention to the point I have
mentioned; every gentleman sees that the prospect of our harvest from the Spring
importations is daily vanishing; and if the committee delay levying and collecting an
impost until a system of protecting duties shall be perfected, there will be no
importations of any consequence on which the law is to operate, because, by that
time, all the Spring vessels will have arrived. Therefore, from a pursuit of this policy,
we shall suffer a loss equal to the surplus which might be expected from a system of
higher duties.
I am sensible that there is great weight in the observation that fell from the honorable
gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. Tucker,) that it will be necessary, on the one
hand, to weigh and regard the sentiments of the gentlemen from the different parts of
the United States; but, on the other hand, we must limit our consideration on this
head, and, notwithstanding all the deference and respect we pay to those sentiments,
we must consider the general interest of the Union; for this is as much every
gentleman’s duty to consider as is the local or State interest—and any system of
impost that this committee may adopt must be founded on the principles of mutual
concession.
Gentlemen will be pleased to recollect, that those parts of the Union which contribute
more under one system than the other, are also those parts more thinly planted, and
consequently stand most in need of national protection; therefore they will have less
reason to complain of unequal burdens.
There is another consideration: the States that are most advanced in population, and
ripe for manufactures, ought to have their particular interests attended to in some
degree. While these States retained the power of making regulations of trade, they had
the power to protect and cherish such institutions; by adopting the present
Constitution they have thrown the exercise of this power into other hands; they must
have done this with an expectation that those interests would not be neglected here.
I am afraid, sir, on the one hand, that if we go fully into a discussion of the subject,
we shall consume more time than prudence would dictate to spare; on the other hand,
if we do not develope it, and see the principles on which we mutually act, we shall
subject ourselves to great difficulties. I beg leave, therefore, to state the grounds on
which my opinion, with respect to the matter under consideration, is founded, namely,
whether our present system should be a temporary or a permanent one? In the first
place, I own myself the friend to a very free system of commerce, and hold it as a
truth, that commercial shackles are generally unjust, oppressive, and impolitic; it is
also a truth, that if industry and labor are left to take their own course, they will
generally be directed to those objects which are the most productive, and this in a
more certain and direct manner than the wisdom of the most enlightened Legislature
could point out. Nor do I think that the national interest is more promoted by such
restrictions than that the interest of individuals would be promoted by legislative
interference directing the particular application of its industry. For example, we
should find no advantage in saying that every man should be obliged to furnish
himself, by his own labor, with those accommodations which depend on the mechanic
arts, instead of employing his neighbor, who could do it for him on better terms. It
would be of no advantage to the shoemaker to make his own clothes to save the
expense of the tailor’s bill, nor of the tailor to make his own shoes to save the expense
of procuring them from the shoemaker. It would be better policy to suffer each of
them to employ his talents in his own way. The case is the same between the exercise
of the arts and agriculture—between the city and the country—and between city and
town; each capable of making particular articles in abundance to supply the other:
thus all are benefited by exchange, and the less this exchange is cramped by
Government, the greater are the proportions of benefit to each. The same argument
holds good between nation and nation, and between parts of the same nation.
In my opinion it would be proper also for gentlemen to consider the means of
encouraging the great staple of America, I mean agriculture; which I think may justly
be styled the staple of the United States, from the spontaneous productions which
nature furnishes, and the manifest advantage it has over every other object of
emolument in this country. If we compare the cheapness of our land with that of other
nations, we see so decided an advantage in that cheapness, as to have full confidence
of being unrivalled. With respect to the object of manufactures, other countries may
and do rival us; but we may be said to have a monopoly in agriculture; the possession
of the soil, and the lowness of its price, give us as much a monopoly in this case as
any nation or other parts of the world have in the monopoly of any article whatever;
but with this advantage to us, that it cannot be shared nor injured by rivalship.
If my general principle is a good one, that commerce ought to be free, and labor and
industry left at large to find its proper object, the only thing which remains will be to
discover the exceptions that do not come within the rule I have laid down. I agree
with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that there are exceptions important in
themselves, and which claim the particular attention of the committee. Although the
freedom of commerce would be advantageous to the world, yet, in some particulars,
one nation might suffer to benefit others, and this ought to be for the general good of
society.
If America was to leave her ports perfectly free, and make no discrimination between
vessels owned by her citizens and those owned by foreigners, while other nations
make this discrimination, it is obvious that such policy would go to exclude American
shipping altogether from foreign ports, and she would be materially affected in one of
her most important interests. To this we may add another consideration, that by
encouraging the means of transporting our productions with facility, we encourage the
raising them: and this object, I apprehend, is likely to be kept in view by the General
Government.
Duties laid on imported articles may have an effect which comes within the idea of
national prudence. It may happen that materials for manufactures may grow up
without any encouragement for this purpose; it has been the case in some of the
States, but in others regulations have been provided, and have succeeded in producing
some establishments, which ought not to be allowed to perish, from the alteration
which has taken place: it would be cruel to neglect them and divert their industry to
other channels; for it is not possible for the hand of man to shift from one employment
to another without being injured by the change. There may be some manufactures,
which, being once formed, can advance towards perfection without any adventitious
aid, while others, for want of the fostering hand of Government, will be unable to go
on at all. Legislative attention will therefore be necessary to collect the proper objects
for this purpose, and this will form another exception to my general principle.
I observe that a sumptuary prohibition is within the view of some of the proposed
articles, and forms another exception. I acknowledge that I do not, in general, think
any great national advantage arises from restrictions passed on this head, because, as
long as a distinction in point of value subsists, sumptuary duties, in some form or
other, will prevail and take effect.
Another exception is embargoes in time of war. These may necessarily occur and
shackle the freedom of commerce; but the reasons for this are so obvious, that it
renders any remark unnecessary.
The next exception that occurs, is one on which great stress is laid by some well
informed men, and this with great plausibility. That each nation should have within
itself the means of defence, independent of foreign supplies: that in whatever relates
to the operations of war, no State ought to depend upon a precarious supply from any
part of the world. There may be some truth in this remark, and therefore it is proper
for legislative attention. I am, though, well persuaded that the reasoning on this
subject has been carried too far. The difficulties we experienced a few years ago of
obtaining military supplies, ought not furnish too much in favor of an establishment
which would be difficult and expensive; because our national character is now
established and recognised throughout the world, and the laws of war favor national
exertion more than intestine commotion, so that there is good reason to believe that,
when it becomes necessary, we may obtain supplies from abroad as readily as any
other nation whatsoever. I have mentioned this because I think I see something among
the enumerated articles that seems to favor such a policy.
The impost laid on trade for the purpose of obtaining revenue may likewise be
considered as an exception; so far, therefore, as revenue can be more conveniently
and certainly raised by this than any other method, without injury to the community,
and its operation will be in due proportion to the consumption, which consumption is
generally proportioned to the circumstances of individuals, I think sound policy
dictates to use this means; but it will be necessary to confine our attention at this time
peculiarly to the object of revenue, because the other subject involves some intricate
questions, to unravel which we perhaps are not prepared. I have no objection to the
committee’s accepting the propositions offered by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
because so far as we can enumerate the proper objects, and apply specific duties to
them, we conform to the practice prevalent in many of the States, and adopt the most
laudable method of collecting revenue, at least preferable to laying a general tax.
Whether, therefore, we consult ease and convenience in collection, or pursuing habits
already adopted and approved, specific duties, as far as the articles can be properly
enumerated, is the most eligible mode of obtaining the end in contemplation. Upon
the whole, as I think some of the propositions may be productive of revenue, and
some may protect our domestic manufactures, though the latter subject ought not to be
too confusedly blended with the former, I hope the committee will receive them, and
let them lie over, in order that we may have time to consider how far they are
consistent with justice and policy.1
APRIL 21. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.
Some gentlemen have seemed to call in question the policy of discriminating between
nations in commercial alliance with the United States, and those with whom no
treaties exist. For my own part, I am well satisfied that there are good and substantial
reasons for making it. In the first place, it may not be unworthy of consideration, that
the public sentiments of America will be favorable to such discrimination. I am sure,
with respect to that part from which I come, it will not be a pleasing ingredient in your
laws, if they find foreigners of every nation put on a footing with those in alliance
with us. There is another reason, which, perhaps, is more applicable to some parts of
the Union than others; one of the few nations with which America has formed
commercial connexions has relaxed considerably in that rigid policy it before
pursued—not so far, to be sure, as America could wish, with respect to opening her
ports to our trade; but she has permitted our ready built ships a sale, and entitles them
to the same advantage, when owned by her own citizens, as if they had been built in
France, subjecting the sale to a duty of five per cent. The British market receives
none; the disabilities of our ships to trade with their colonies continue, even if they are
purchased by the subjects of Great Britain; of consequence, they cannot be sold
without a considerable loss. Nay, so cautious are they to prevent the advantages we
naturally possess, that they will not suffer a British ship to be repaired in America,
beyond a certain proportion of her value; they even will not permit our vessels to be
repaired in their ports.
Another consideration has some weight with me in deciding the question of
discrimination. The policy of our ally, from the views of the minister employed, has
frequently been adverse to the interest of this country. The person who has had the
charge of our affairs at that Court has long been soliciting a relaxation in our favor,
and although it cannot be declared that he has succeeded, yet there is reason to believe
he has made some impressions, which our conduct ought to avoid effacing; they are
such as merit national attention, and might justify a discrimination at this time,
although it may be proper to hold ourselves at liberty to pursue that policy which a
change may make necessary. There are also other considerations which ought to be
taken into view. From artificial or adventitious causes, the commerce between
America and Great Britain exceeds what may be considered its natural boundary. I
find from an examination of the accounts of tonnage for the three large States of
Massachusetts, Virginia, and South Carolina, that the tonnage of nations in alliance
with us holds no proportion with that of Great Britain, or of the United States. This is
a proof that a very small direct commerce takes place between those countries and
this; that there is less of direct intercourse than there would naturally be if those
extraneous and adventitious causes did not prevent it; such as the long possession of
our trade, their commercial regulations calculated to retain it, their similarity of
language and manners, their conformity of laws and other circumstances—all these
concurring have made their commerce with us more extensive than their natural
situation would require it to be. I would wish, therefore, to give such political
advantages to those nations, as might enable them to gain their proportion of our
direct trade from the nation who has acquired more than it is naturally her due. From
this view of the subject, I am led to believe it would be good policy to make the
proposed discrimination between them. Is it not also of some importance, that we
should enable nations in treaty with us to draw some advantage from our alliance, and
thereby impress those Powers that have hitherto neglected to treat with us, with the
idea that advantages are to be gained by a reciprocity of friendship? If we give every
thing equally to those who have or have not formed treaties, surely we do not furnish
to them any motive for courting our connexion.
It has been objected, that the price of our produce at foreign markets would not bear
this additional burden, and that the freight must be paid by the planters. It will be
unnecessary, after what was said by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr.
Fitzsimons,) to take up the time of the committee in observing that foreigners must
receive our tobacco, rice, &c., in American shipping, if they cannot be otherwise got.
There may be a discrimination made in other respects besides in tonnage, so that a
very high impost on this article need not be insisted upon. But will any gentleman say,
British vessels ought to enjoy in American ports greater advantages than are enjoyed
by Americans in British ports? Yet were the duties laid equal in both cases, the British
merchant would have a very great superiority. In the first place, some of the most
valuable ports which she possesses, and most conducive to our interest, are absolutely
closed, while every port in the United States is open to her without restriction or
limitation. Again, even in those which it is permitted America to enter her vessels, she
must bring nothing but the produce of her own soil, whilst the British ship makes
circuitous voyages, and brings with her the produce of every quarter of the globe.
These are material advantages; and take the whole of these observations together, I
think they furnish substantial reasons for making the proposed discrimination.
APRIL 21. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.
I am a friend to free commerce, and, at the same time, a friend to such regulations as
are calculated to promote our own interest, and this on national principles. The great
principle of interest is a leading one with me, and yet my combination of ideas on this
head leads me to a very different conclusion from that made by the gentleman from
New York, (Mr. Lawrence.) I wish we were under less necessity than I find we are to
shackle our commerce with duties, restrictions, and preferences; but there are cases in
which it is impossible to avoid following the example of other nations in the great
diversity of our trade. Some reasons for this were mentioned on a former occasion;
they have been frequently illustrated in the progress of this business, and the decision
of the committee has proved them to be necessary.
I beg leave to remark, in answer to a train of ideas which the gentleman last up has
brought into view, that although interest will, in general, operate effectually to
produce political good, yet there are causes in which certain factitious circumstances
may divert it from its natural channel, or throw or retain it in an artificial one. Have
we not been exercised on this topic for a long time past? Or why has it been necessary
to give encouragement to particular species of industry, but to turn the stream in favor
of an interest that would not otherwise succeed? But laying aside the illustration of
these causes, so well known to all nations, where cities, companies, or opulent
individuals engross the business from others, by having had an uninterrupted
possession of it, or by the extent of their capitals being able to destroy a competition,
let us proceed to examine what ought to be our conduct on this principle, upon the
present occasion. Suppose two commercial cities, one possessed of enormous capitals
and long habits of business, whilst the other is possessed of superior natural
advantages, but without that course of business and chain of connexions which the
other has: is it possible, in the nature of things, that the latter city should carry on a
successful competition with the former? Thus it is with nations; and when we
consider the vast quantities of our produce sent to the different parts of Europe, and
the great importations from the same places; that almost all of this commerce is
transacted through the medium of British ships and British merchants, I cannot help
conceiving that, from the force of habit and other conspiring causes, that nation is in
possession of a much greater proportion of our trade than she is naturally entitled to.
Trade, then, being restrained to an artificial channel, is not so advantageous to
America as a direct intercourse would be; it becomes therefore the duty of those to
whose care the public interest and welfare are committed, to turn the tide to a more
favorable direction.
In the trade of South Carolina is employed annually about 56,977 tons of shipping.
The proportion of French and Dutch is about 2,100 tons, while that of Great Britain is
about 19,000. In Massachusetts the quantity is about 85,551 tons; it is stated, that
there are belonging to the State, 76,857, the remainder is foreign, and mostly British.
In Virginia we have 56,272 tons; 26,903 British, and only 2,664 of the French and
Dutch. I cannot, from this view of the subject, be persuaded to believe that every part
of our trade flows in those channels which would be most natural and profitable to us,
or those which reason would dictate to us, if we were unincumbered of old habits and
other accidental circumstances that hurry us along.
It has been asked by the gentleman from New York (Mr. Lawrence) what evidence
we had that the public sentiments of America were in favor of discrimination?
Perhaps it would be improper on this occasion to adduce any other proof of the fact
than from the transactions of public bodies; and here, I think, is abundant proof to be
found. The State of Virginia, if I am not mistaken, lays a double duty on tonnage;
French and Dutch vessels pay half a dollar per ton, while the vessels of Great Britain
are subjected to one dollar. There are other distinctions in our revenue laws
manifesting the same principle; some of them establish a preference to French wines
and brandy. In Maryland, a similar policy has prevailed. I believe the difference there
is about one-third in favor of our allies, (if I err, the gentlemen from that State can set
me right;) in Pennsylvania, there is a discrimination of about a fourth. I do not
certainly recollect, but I believe the like policy exists in other States; but I have not
had an opportunity of searching their laws on this point, but what I have enumerated
are facts affording substantial proof that the public sentiment does favor the
discrimination.
