Speech on Jay's Treaty (On the Merits)
James Madison
House of Representatives, April 15, 1796
Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, vol. 6, pp. 151-161
       (via Online Library of Liberty, Liberty Fund)

---

Mr. M. said, on a subject of such extent and importance, he should not attempt to go
through all the observations that might be applicable to it. A general view of the
subject was all that he meant at present. His omissions would be more than supplied
by others who might enter into the discussion.
The proposition immediately before the Committee was, that the Treaty with Great
Britain ought to be carried into effect by such provisions as depended on the House of
Representatives. This was the point immediately in question. But it would be proper
in examining it to keep in view also the proposition of the gentleman from
Pennsylvania [Mr. Maclay] which had been referred to the Committee, and which
would be taken up of course, if the immediate question should be decided in the
negative.
If the proposition for carrying the Treaty into effect be agreed to, it must be from one
of three considerations: either that the Legislature is bound by a Constitutional
necessity to pass the requisite laws without examining the merits of the Treaty, or
that, on such examination, the Treaty is deemed in itself a good one, or that there are
good extraneous reasons for putting it into force, although it be in itself a good one, or
that there are good extraneous reasons for putting it into force, although it be in itself
a bad Treaty.
The first consideration being excluded by the decision of the House, that they have a
right to judge of the expediency or inexpediency of passing laws relative to Treaties;
the question first to be examined must relate to the merits of the Treaty. He then
proceeded to consider the Treaty under three aspects: first, as it related to the
execution of the Treaty of Peace in 1783; secondly, as it determines the several points
in the Law of Nations; thirdly, as it respects the commerce between the two nations.
First. He would not inquire on which side the blame lay, of having first violated the
Treaty of 1783, or of having most contributed to delay its execution, although he did
not shrink from the task under any apprehension that the result could be
disadvantageous to this country. The Treaty itself had waived this inquiry, and
professed to adjust all controversies on this subject, without regard to the mutual
complaints or pretensions of the parties. It was, therefore, justly and naturally to be
expected, that the arrangements for carrying that Treaty into effect would have been
founded in the most exact and scrupulous reciprocity. Was this the case? He was sorry
that, on the contrary, the arrangements were founded on the grossest violation of that
principle.
There were two articles which had not been executed by Great Britain; that which
related to the negroes and other property carried away, and that which required a
surrender of the posts. The article unexecuted by the United States was, that which
required payment of all bona fide debts, according to the Treaty now in question: this
article is now to be carried into the most complete effect by the United States, and
damages to the last fraction are to be paid for the delay. Is there a reciprocal
stipulation by Great Britain with respect to the articles unexecuted by her? Nothing
like it. She is wholly absolved from the obligation to fulfil one of the articles, viz.:
that relating to the negroes, &c., and she is to make no compensation whatever for
delaying to fulfil the other, viz.: the surrender of the posts.
It had been urged in apology for those very unequal stipulations, that the injury
resulting from a forbearance to surrender the posts, was not susceptible of any precise
liquidation into pecuniary damages. However plausible this might appear, it was by
no means satisfactory. Commissioners, such as were appointed, with full discretion
for other purposes, might have been charged with this subject, and if they could not
have done exact justice, might have mitigated the injustice of doing nothing.
Apologies had been attempted also for the very extraordinary abandonment of the
compensation due for the negroes, &c. It was said to be at least doubtful whether this
claim was authorized by the seventh article of the Treaty of Peace, and that Great
Britain had uniformly denied the meaning put by the United States on that article. In
reply he made two remarks. First, that it was not true that Great Britain had uniformly
denied the American construction of that article; on the contrary, he believed, it could
be proved, that till of late, Great Britain had uniformly admitted this construction, and
had rejected the claim on no other ground than the alleged violation of the fourth
article on the part of the United States.
But had it been true that Great Britain had uniformly asserted a different construction
of the article, and refused to accede to ours, what ought to have been done? Ought we
to have at once acceded to hers? By no means. Each party had an equal right to
interpret the compact; and if they could not agree, they ought to have done in this
what they did in other cases where they could not agree; that is, have referred the
settlement of the meaning of the compact to an arbitration. To give up the claim
altogether, was to admit, either that Great Britain had a better right than the United
States to explain the controverted point, or that the United States had done something
which in justice called for a sacrifice of their equal right.
It was evident, he thought, from this view of the subject, that the arrangements with
respect to the Treaty of Peace were frequently wanting both in justice and reciprocity.
It would seem, from the face of the Treaty, and the order of the articles, that the
compensation for the spoliations on our trade had been combined with the execution
of the Treaty of Peace; and might therefore have been viewed as a substitute for the
compensation for the negroes, &c. If this was the meaning of the instrument, it could
not be the less obnoxious to reasonable and fair judges. No man was more thoroughly
convinced than himself of the perfect justice on which the claims of the merchants
against Great Britain were founded, nor any one more desirous to see them fully
indemnified. But compensation to them could never be a just substitute for the
compensation due to others. It was impossible that any claims could be better founded
than those of the sufferers under the seventh article of the Treaty of Peace; because
they were supported by positive and acknowledged stipulation, as well as by equity
and right. Just and strong as the claims of the merchants might be, and certainly were,
the United States could not be obliged to take more care of them than of the claims
equally just and strong of other citizens, much less to sacrifice to them the claims for
property wrongfully carried off at the close of the war, and obtaining stipulations in
favor of the mercantile claims, the mercantile claims had been relinquished, and the
other claims provided for; he asked whether the complaints of the merchants would
not have been as universal and as loud as they would have been just?
Besides the omissions in favor of Great Britain, already pointed out with respect to
the execution of the Treaty of Peace, he observed, that conditions were annexed to the
partial execution of it in the surrender of the Western posts, which increased the
general inequality of this part of the Treaty, and essentially affected the value of those
objects.
The value of the posts to the United States was to be estimated by their
influence—1st, on the Indian trade; 2d, on the conduct and temper of the Indians
towards the United States.
Their influence on the Indian trade depended principally on the exclusive command
they gave to the several carrying places connected with the posts. These places were
understood to be of such importance in this respect, that those who possessed them
exclusively would have a monopoly, or nearly a monopoly, of the lucrative
intercourse with a great part of the savage nations. Great Britain having hitherto
possessed these places exclusively, has possessed this advantage. It was expected that
the exclusive transfer of them would transfer the advantage to the United States. By
the Treaty now concluded, the carrying places are to be enjoyed in common, and it
will be determined by the respective advantages under which British and American
traders will engage in the trade, which of them is to share most in it. In this point of
view he thought the regulation highly impolitic and injurious. He would say little of
the advantage which the British would have in their superior capital: that must be
encountered in all our commercial rivalships. But there was another consideration
which ought to have great weight on this subject. The goods imported for the Indian
trade through Canada pay no duties. Those imported through the United States for that
trade, will have paid duties from seven to ten per cent., and every one must see that a
drawback is impracticable, or would be attended with an expense which the business
would not bear. So far, then, as the importance of the posts is to be considered in a
commercial view, they are, in a very great measure, stripped of it by the condition
annexed to the surrender of them. Instead of a monopoly in our favor, the carrying
places are made common under circumstances which may leave a monopoly in the
hands of Great Britain. And this is done, too, by an article which is to last forever.
Second. The influence of the posts on the general conduct of the Indians, is well
known to depend chiefly on their influence on the Indian trade. In proportion,
therefore, as the condition annexed to the surrender of posts affects the one, it must
affect the other. If the British should continue to enjoy the Indian trade, they would
continue to influence the Indian conduct; if not in the same degree as heretofore, at
least in so great a degree as to condemn the article in question.
He mentioned the permission to aliens to hold land in perpetuity as a very
extraordinary feature in this part of the Treaty. He would not inquire how far this
might be authorized by Constitutional principles. But he would continue to say, that
no example of such a stipulation was to be found in any Treaty that ever was made,
either where territory was ceded, or where it was acknowledged by one nation to
another. Although it was common and right in such cases to make regulation in favor
of the property of the inhabitants, yet he believed, that in every case that had ever
happened, the owners of landed property were universally required to swear
allegiance to the new sovereign, or to dispose of their landed property within a
reasonable time.
He took notice also of the inequality of the stipulation which opened all the ports of
the United States, as the condition of having those of an unimportant province of
Great Britain opened in return.
With respect to the Mississippi he could not but consider the clause relating to it as
being singularly reprehensible. Happily the adjustment of our claims with Spain had
been brought about before any evil operation of the clause had been experienced. But
the tendency of it, he thought, could not be doubted. It was the more remarkable, that
this extension of the privileges of Great Britain on the Mississippi beyond those in the
Treaty of Peace, should have been admitted into the new Treaty, because it is
supposed by the Treaty itself, that Great Britain may be deprived, by her real
boundary, of all pretensions to a share in the banks and waters of the Mississippi.
With respect to the great points in the Law of Nations, comprehended in the
stipulations of the Treaty, the same want of real reciprocity, and the same sacrifice of
the interests of the United States, were conspicuous.
It was well known to have been a great and favorite object with the United States,
“that free ships make free goods.” They have established this principle in all their
other Treaties. They have witnessed with anxiety the general effort, and the successful
advances towards incorporating this principle into the Law of Nations; a principle
friendly to all neutral nations, and particularly interesting to the United States. He
knew that at a former period it had been conceded on the part of the United States that
the Law of Nations stood as the present Treaty regulates it. But it did not follow that
more than acquiescence in that doctrine was proper. There was an evident distinction
between silently acquiescing in it, and giving it the support of a formal and positive
stipulation. The former was all that could have been required, and the latter was more
than ought to have been unnecessarily yielded.
In the enumeration of contraband articles, the Treaty was liable to similar
observations. The circumstances and interests of the United States had given way to
the particular views of the other party. The example in all other Treaties has been
disregarded. Hemp, tar, pitch, turpentine, &c., important staples of this country, are,
without even a pretext of reciprocity, subjected to confiscation. No nation which
produced these articles had, he believed, Treaties at present making the same
sacrifice, except Denmark, who, in the year 1780, had been induced, he knew not by
what means, into an explanation of the Treaty of 1670, by which these articles are
declared to be contraband. He observed, that this supplementary and explanatory
agreement between Great Britain and Denmark appeared to have been the model
selected for the contraband list in the Treaty now in question. The enumeration in the
latter was transcribed, word for word, from the former, with a single exception, which
might be thought remarkable. The article of horses, which was included in the
original, was dropped in the copy. In this particular the article had departed from
Vattel also, although in general the Treaty seemed to have availed itself wherever it
readily could of his authority.
But, what was far more remarkable, the copy had proceeded just as far as answered
the purposes of Great Britain, and stopped at the very point where the original would
have answered the just and essential purposes of the United States. After enumerating
the articles to be deemed contraband, the Danish article goes on in the words
following, viz: “But it is expressly declared that among contraband merchandises
shall not be comprehended fish and meats, whether fresh or salted, wheat, flour, corn,
or other grain, beans, oil, wine, and generally whatever serves for the nourishment
and support of life, all of which may at all times be sold and transported like any other
merchandises, even to places held by an enemy of the two Crowns, provided they be
not besieged or blockaded.”
This view of the subject naturally led him to take notice of the clause in the British
Treaty relating to provisions; which, to say the least, wore an ambiguous countenance
that was extremely disagreeable, or which rather seemed to carry a necessary
implication that provisions, though not bound to besieged or blockaded places, might,
according to the existing Law of Nations, be regarded as contraband. According to the
genuine Law of Nations, no articles which are not expressly and generally contraband,
are so, except in the single case of their going to a besieged place; yet it is admitted in
the Treaty that there are other cases when provisions may be contraband, whence the
implication results, that one of the cases might be that which had been assumed and
put in force by Great Britain in relation to the United States. The little cases which
might be devised as appurtenant to the law which condemns what is bound to
blockaded places, cannot satisfy the import of the stipulation, because such cases
cannot be presumed to have been in the contemplation of the parties. And if the
particular case of provisions bound to a country at war, although not to a besieged
place, was not meant to be one of the cases of contraband, according to the existing
Law of Nations, how necessary was it to have said so; and how easy and natural
would that course have been, with the Danish example on the subject before their
eyes.
On the supposition that provisions in our own vessels bound to countries at war with
Great Britain, can be now seized by her for her own use, on the condition stipulated,
this feature of the Treaty presents itself in a very serious light, indeed, especially if the
doctrine be resorted to as laid down by the Executive, in the letter of the then
Secretary of State [Mr. Jefferson] to Mr. Pinckney, on the 7th September, 1793. This
letter is a comment on the British instructions of June 8, 1793, for seizing neutral
provisions. After stating the measure as a flagrant breach of the Law of Nations, and
as ruinous to our commerce and agriculture, it has the following paragraph: “This act,
too, tends directly to draw us from that state of peace in which we are wishing to
remain. It is an essential character of neutrality to furnish no aids not stipulated by
Treaty,” that is, said Mr. M., by a Treaty made before the war, “to one party which we
are not equally ready to furnish to the other. If we permit corn to be sent to Great
Britain and her friends, we are equally bound to permit it to France. To restrain it,
would be a partiality which must lead to war; and between restraining it ourselves and
permitting her enemies to restrain it unrightfully is no difference. She would consider
this as a mere pretext, of which she would not be the dupe; and on what honorable
ground could we otherwise explain it? Thus we should see ourselves plunged, by this
unauthorized act of Great Britain, into a war with which we meddle not, and which
we wish to avoid, if justice to all parties and from all parties will enable us to avoid
it.” He entreated the Committee to bestow on this interesting Executive document all
the attention which it demanded.
The article prohibiting sequestration was next considered by Mr. M. He said he
should probably be among the last who would be disposed to resort to such an
expedient for redress. But he could not approve of a perpetual and irrecoverable
abandonment of a defensive weapon, the existence of which might render the use of it
unnecessary. The situation of this country in relation to Great Britain was a peculiar
one. As we had not fleets and armies to command a respect for our rights, we ought to
keep in our hands all such means as our situation gave us. This article was another
instance in which no regard was paid to reciprocity. British subjects, it was well
known, had and were likely to have in this country a great deal of the property of the
king made sacred. American citizens, it was as well known, had little, and were likely
to have little of the kind in Great Britain. If a real reciprocity had been intended, why
were not other kinds of private property, as vessels and their cargoes, equally
protected against violation? These, even within the jurisdiction of Great Britain, are
left open to seizure and sequestration, if Great Britain finds it expedient. And why
was not property on the high seas under the protection of the Law of Nations, which is
said to be a part of the law of the land, made secure by a like stipulation? This would
have given a face of equality and reciprocity to the bargain. But nothing of the sort
makes a part of it; where Great Britain had a particular interest at stake, the Treaty
watchfully provides for it; when the United States have an equal interest at stake and
equally entitled to protection, it is abandoned to all the dangers which it has
experienced.
After taking this brief notice of the positive evils in this part of the Treaty, he might,
he said, add the various omissions which were chargeable on it. But as he should not
pretend to exhaust the subject, he would mention one only: the not providing for the
respect due to the exhibition of sea papers. He could not but regard this omission as
truly extraordinary, when he observed that in almost every modern Treaty, and
particularly all our other Treaties, an article on this subject was regularly inserted.
Indeed, it had become almost an article of course in the Treaties of the present
century.
Thirdly. The commercial articles of the Treaty presented the third aspect under which
he was to consider it. In the free intercourse stipulated between the United States and
Great Britain, it could not be pretended that any advantage was gained by the former.
A Treaty was surely not necessary to induce Great Britain to receive our raw materials
and to sell us her manufactures. On the other hand, consider what was given up by the
United States.
When the Government came into operation, it is well known that the American
tonnage employed in the British trade bore the most inconsiderable proportion to the
British tonnage. There being nothing on our side to counteract the influence of capital
and other circumstances on the British side, that disproportion was the natural state of
things. As some balance to the British advantages, and particularly that of her capital,
our laws had made several regulations in favor of our shipping, among which was the
important encouragement resulting from the difference of ten per cent. in the duties
paid by American and foreign vessels. Under this encouragement the American
tonnage has increased in a very respectable proportion to the British tonnage. Nor has
Great Britain ever deemed it prudent to attempt any countervailing measures for her
shipping, well knowing that we could easily keep up the differences by further
measures on our side. But by the Treaty, she has reserved to herself the right to take
such countervailing measures against our existing regulations; and we have
surrendered our rights to pursue further defensive measures against the influence of
her capital. It is justly to be apprehended, therefore, that under such a restoration of
the former state of things, the American tonnage will relapse to its former
disproportion to the British tonnage.
When he turned his attention to the West India branch of the subject, there was still
greater cause for wonder and dissatisfaction. As the Treaty now stood, Great Britain
was left as free as she ever had been to continue the entire monopoly of the
intercourse to British vessels. Recollecting, as he did, and as every member of the
Committee must do, the whole history of this subject from the peace of 1783, through
every subsequent stage of our Independence down to the mission of the late Envoy, it
was impossible for him to express his astonishment that any Treaty of Commerce
should have ever been acceded to which abandoned the very object for which such a
Treaty was ever contemplated. He never could have believed that the time was so near
when all the principles, claims, and calculations, which have heretofore prevailed
among all classes of people, in every part of the Union, on this interesting point, were
to be so completely renounced. A Treaty of Commerce with Great Britain, excluding
a reciprocity for our vessels in the West India trade, is a phenomenon which had filled
him with more surprise than he knew how to express.
He might be told, perhaps, 1st. That Great Britain granted to no other nation the
privilege granted to the United States of trading at all with her West Indies; and, 2dly.
That this was an important relaxation of the Colony system established among the
nations of Europe.
To the first, it was enough to reply, that no other nation bore the same relation to the
West Indies, as the United States were essential to those Islands; and the trade with
them had been permitted purely on that account, and not as a beneficial privilege to
the United States.
To the second, that it was not true that the Colony system required an exclusion of
foreign vessels from the carrying trade between the Colonies and foreign countries, on
the contrary, the principle and practice of the Colony system were to prohibit, as
much as would be convenient, all trade between the Colonies and foreign countries;
but when such a trade was permitted at all as necessary for the Colonies, then to allow
the vessels of such foreign countries a reciprocal right of being employed in the trade.
Great Britain had accordingly restrained the trade of her Islands in this country as far
as her interest in them would permit. But had she allowed our vessels their reciprocal
right to carry on the trade so far as it was not restrained? No. Here she forced a
monopoly in her own favor, contrary to justice, and contrary to the Colony system of
every European nation having Colonies; which, without a single exception, never
opens the trade between their Colonies and other countries without opening it equally
to vessels on both sides. This is evidently nothing more than right and fair. A Colony
is a part of an Empire. If a nation choose, they may prohibit all trade between a
Colony and a foreign country, as they may between any other part of their dominions
and a foreign country. But if they permit such a trade at all, it must be free to vessels
on both sides as well in the case of Colonies as of any other parts of their dominions.
Great Britain has the same right to prohibit foreign trade between London and the
United States as between Jamaica and the United States; but if no such prohibition be
made with respect to either, she is equally bound to allow foreign vessels a common
right with her own in both. If Great Britain were to say that no trade whatever should
be carried on between London and the United States, she would exercise a right which
we could not complain of. If she were to say that no American vessel should be
employed in the trade, it would produce just complaint, and justify a reciprocal
regulation as to her vessels. The case of the trade from a port in the West Indies is
precisely similar.
To place the omission of the Treaty to provide a reciprocity for our vessels in the
West India trade in its true light, it would be proper to attend to another part of the
Treaty, which tied up the hands of this country against every effort for making it the
interest of Great Britain to yield to our reasonable claims.
He then pointed to the clause which restrains the United States from imposing
prohibitions or duties in any case on Britain which did not extend to all other nations;
observing that the clause made it impossible to operate on the unreasonable policy of
that nation, without suspending our commerce at the same time with all other nations
whose regulations with respect to us might be ever so favorable and satisfactory.
The fifteenth article had another extraordinary feature, which must strike every
observer. In other Treaties, putting the parties on the footing of the most favored
nation, it was stipulated that where new favors were granted to a particular nation in
return for favors received, the party claiming the new favor should pay the price of it.
This was just and proper where the footing of the most favored nation is established at
all. But this article gives to Great Britain the full benefit of all privileges that may be
granted to any other nation, without requiring from her the same or equivalent
privileges with those granted by such nation. Hence it would happen that if Spain,
Portugal, or France, should open their Colonial ports to the United States in
consideration of certain privileges in our trade, the same privileges would result
gratis, and ipso facto, to Great Britain. He considered this stipulation as peculiarly
impolitic, and that it could not fail, in the view of the Committee, to form a very solid
and weighty objection to the Treaty.
He was not unaware of the stress that would be laid on the article relating to the East
Indies. He should leave to others better acquainted than himself with this branch of
the subject to explain it. He made two observations, however: one was, that judicious
and well informed gentlemen, equally judicious and well informed with any who
could be consulted, considered the article as offering not a shadow of advantage to the
United States. The other was, that no privilege was stipulated which had not been
uniformly heretofore granted without stipulation; and as the grant could have
proceeded from no motive but a pure regard to the British interest in that country,
there was every reasonable security that the trade would continue open as it had been,
under the influence of the same consideration.
Such being the character of the Treaty, with respect to the execution of the Treaty of
Peace, the great principles of the Law of Nations, and the regulations of commerce, it
never could be viewed as having any claim to be carried into effect on its own
account.
Was there, then, any consideration extraneous to the Treaty that could furnish the
requisite motives? On this subject, he observed that the House was wholly without
information. And for himself he was ready to declare that he had neither seen, nor
known, nor heard, of any circumstances in the general posture of things, or in the
particular relation of this country to them, that could account for the unequal and
injurious arrangements which we were now called upon for laws to execute.
But there was something farther to be taken into the account. The continuance of the
spoliations on our trade, and the impressment of our seamen, whether, as stated in the
motion of the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Maclay], to be understood as
practical comments on the Treaty, or as infractions of it, could not but enforce on the
minds of the Committee the most serious reflections. Here he referred again to the
passage he had read in the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Pinckney, and asked, if, as
there stated by the Executive, our neutrality and peace were to be exposed, by
permitting practices of that kind, what might be thought of our giving effect, in the
midst of such practices, to a Treaty from which a countenance might be derived by the
nation for going on with them.
He was aware that the Executive, notwithstanding the doctrine and policy laid down
as above, had finally concurred in the Treaty under such circumstances. But he did not
consider that as invalidating the reasoning drawn from the present state of things. He
might, he said, be stepping on delicate ground, but he could not think it improper to
remark, that it was a known fact that the Executive actually paused for some weeks
after the concurrence of the Senate, before the Treaty received his signature; that it is
fairly to be presumed that a renewal of the spoliations, and a recollection of the light
in which they had been represented, were a ground of the pause; that on that
supposition he was probably influenced in signing the Treaty when he did, by an
expectation that such a mark of confidence in the British Government would produce
an abolition of the unlawful proceeding, and, consequently, if it had been foreseen
that the spoliations would have been continued as we find them to be, the Treaty
would not have been then signed, or if it had not then been signed, it would not be
signed, under the circumstances of the moment when it falls under our consideration.
He should conclude, he said, with taking notice of two considerations which had been
much used as inducements to carrying the Treaty into effect.
1. It was said that the greater part of the Treaty was to continue two years only after
the present war in Europe; and that no very great evils could grow out of it within that
period. To this he replied, in the first place, that ten of the articles containing many
very objectionable stipulations were perpetual. In the next place, that it would be in
the power of Great Britain, at the expiration of the other articles, to produce the same
causes for a renewal of them, as are now urged in their favor. If we are now to enforce
the Treaty, lest Great Britain should stir up the Indians, and refuse to pay the
merchants for the property of which she has plundered them, can she not at the end of
two or three years plunder them again to the same or a greater amount? Cannot the
same apprehensions also be then revived with respect to the Indians, and will not the
arguments then be as strong as they are now, for renewing the same Treaty, or making
any other equal sacrifice that her purposes may dictate?
2. It was asked, what would be the consequence of refusing to carry the Treaty into
effect? He answered, that the only supposable consequence was, that the Executive, if
governed by the prudence and patriotism, which he did not doubt would govern that
department, would, of course, pursue the measures most likely to obtain a
reconsideration and remodification of the offensive parts of the Treaty. The idea of
war, as a consequence of refusing to give effect to the Treaty, was too visionary and
incredible to be admitted into the question. No man would say that the United States,
if an independent people, had not a right to judge of their own interests, and to decline
any Treaty that did not duly provide for them. A refusal, therefore, in such cases,
could give no cause, nor pretext, nor provocation, for war or for any just resentment.
But apart from this, was it conceivable that Great Britain, with all the dangers and
embarrassments which are thickening upon her, would wantonly make war on a
country which was the best market she had in the world for her manufactures, which
paid her an annual balance in specie of ten or twelve millions of dollars, and whose
supplies were moreover essential to an important part of her dominions? Such a
degree of infatuation ought not to be ascribed to any nation. And at the present crisis,
for reasons well known, an unprovoked war with Great Britain, on this country, would
argue a degree of madness greater than under any other circumstances that could well
be imagined.
With all the objections therefore to the Treaty which he had stated, he hoped that it
would not now be carried into effect; and that an opportunity would take place for
reconsidering the subject on principles more just and more favorable to the United
States.
