On the Mississippi Question and Congressional Elections
James Madison, Virginia Ratifying Convention
June 13, 1788

Source: Elliot's Debates, Vol. 3; Papers of James Madison, Vol. 11 (Founders Online: 01-11-02-0080)
Transcribed from Robertson's Debates and ConSource.org

---

[On Congressional Elections]

The reason of the exception was, that if Congress could fix the place of choosing the Senators, it might compel the State Legislatures to elect them in a different place from that of their usual sessions, which would produce some inconvenience, and was not necessary for the object of regulating the elections. But it was necessary to give the General Government a controul over the time and manner of choosing the Senators, to prevent its own dissolution. With respect to the other point, it was thought that the regulation of time, place, and manner of electing the Representatives, should be uniform throughout the Continent. Some States might regulate the elections on the principles of equality, and others might regulate them otherwise. This diversity would be obviously unjust. Elections are regulated now unequally in some States; particularly South-Carolina, with respect to Charleston, which is represented by 30 Members. Should the people of any State, by any means be deprived of the right of suffrage, it was judged proper that it should be remedied by the General Government. It was found impossible to fix the time, place, and manner, of the election of Representatives in the Constitution. It was found necessary to leave the regulation of these, in the first place, to the State Governments, as being best acquainted with the situation of the people, subject to the controul of the General Government, in order to enable it to produce uniformity, and prevent its own dissolution. And considering the State Governments and General Government as distinct bodies, acting in different and independent capacities for the people, it was thought the particular regulations should be submitted to the former, and the general regulations to the latter. Were they exclusively under the controul of the State Governments, the General Government might easily be dissolved. But if they be regulated properly by the State Legislatures, the Congressional controul will very probably never be exercised. The power appears to me satisfactory, and as unlikely to be abused as any part of the Constitution.

[On Adjournment Restrictions]

I wondered that this clause should meet with a shadow of objection. It was possible, he observed, that the two branches might not agree concerning the time of adjourning, and that this possibility suggested the power given the President of adjourning both Houses to such time as he should think proper, in case of their disagreement. That it would be very exceptionable to allow the Senators, or even the Representatives, to adjourn without the consent of the other House, at any season whatsoever, without any regard to the situation of public exigencies. That it was possible, in the nature of things, that some inconvenience might result from it; but that it was as well secured as possible.

[On Congressional Compensation]

I most sincerely wish to give a proper explanation on this subject, in such a manner as may be to the satisfaction of everyone. I shall suggest such considerations as led the Convention to approve of this clause. With respect to the right of ascertaining their own pay, I will acknowledge, that their compensations, if practicable, should be fixed in the Constitution itself, so as not to be dependent on Congress itself, or on the State Legislatures. The various vicissitudes, or rather the gradual diminution of the value of all coins and circulating medium, is one reason against ascertaining them immutably; as what may be now an adequate compensation, might, by the progressive reduction of the value of our circulating medium, be extremely inadequate at a period not far distant. It was thought improper to leave it to the State Legislatures, because it is improper that one Government should be dependent on another: And the great inconveniencies experienced under the old Confederation, shew, that the States would be operated upon by local considerations, as contradistinguished from general and national interests. Experience shews us, that they have been governed by such heretofore, and reason instructs us, that they would be influenced by them again. This theoretic inconvenience of leaving to Congress the fixing their compensations, is more than counterbalanced by this in the Confederation; that the State Legislatures had a right to determine the pay of the Members of Congress, which enabled the States to destroy the General Government. There is no instance where this power has been abused. In America, Legislative bodies have reduced their own wages lower rather than augmented them. This is a power which cannot be abused without rousing universal attention and indignation. What would be the consequence of the Virginian Legislature raising their pay to four or five pounds each per day? The universal indignation of the people. Should the General Congress annex wages disproportionate to their service, or repugnant to the sense of the community, they would be universally execrated. The certainty of incurring the general detestation of the people will prevent abuse. It was conceived, that the great danger was in creating new offices, which would increase the burdens of the people; and not in an uniform admission of all meritorious characters to serve their country in the old offices. There is no instance of any State Constitution which goes as far as this. It was thought to be a mean between two extremes. It guards against abuse by taking away the inducement to create new offices, or increase the emoluments of old offices. And it gives them an opportunity of enjoying, in common with other citizens, any of the existing offices which they may be capable of executing. To have precluded them from this, would have been to exclude them from a common privilege to which every citizen is intitled, and to prevent those who had served their country with the greatest fidelity and ability from being on a par with their fellow-citizens. I think it as well guarded as reason requires: More so than the Constitution of any other nation.

[On the Militia and Law Enforcement]

I supposed the reasons of this power to be so obvious that they would occur to most Gentlemen. If resistance should be made to the execution of the laws, he said, it ought to be overcome. This could be done only two ways; either by regular forces, or by the people. By one or the other it must unquestionably be done. If insurrections should arise, or invasions should take place, the people ought unquestionably to be employed to suppress and repel them, rather than a standing army. The best way to do these things, was to put the militia on a good and sure footing, and enable the Government to make use of their services when necessary.

[On the Militia -- Responding to Mr. Clay]

The power existed in all countries, that the militia might be called forth for that purpose, under the laws of this State and every other State in the Union. That public force must be used, when the resistance to the laws required it, otherwise the society itself must be destroyed. That the mode referred to by the Gentleman might not be sufficient on every occasion, as the sheriff must be necessarily restricted to the posse of his own county. If the posse of one county were insufficient to overcome the resistance to the execution of the laws, this power must be resorted to. He did not by any means admit, that the old mode was superceded by the introduction of the new one. And it was obvious to him, that when the civil power was sufficient, this mode would never be put in practice.

[On the Sword and Purse]

The Honorable Gentleman has laid much stress on the maxim, that the purse and sword ought not to be put in the same hands; with a view of pointing out the impropriety of vesting this power in the General Government. But it is totally inapplicable to this question. What is the meaning of this maxim? Does it mean that the sword and purse ought not to be trusted in the hands of the same Government? This cannot be the meaning. For there never was, and I can say there never will be, an efficient Government, in which both are not vested. The only rational meaning, is, that the sword and purse are not to be given to the same member. Apply it to the British Government which has been mentioned. The sword is in the hands of the British King. The purse in the hands of the Parliament. It is so in America, as far as any analogy can exist. Would the Honorable Member say, that the sword ought to be put in the hands of the Representatives of the people, or in other hands independent of the Government altogether? If he says so, it will violate the meaning of that maxim. This would be a novelty hitherto unprecedented. The purse is in the hands of the Representatives of the people. They have the appropriation of all monies. They have the direction and regulation of land and naval forces. They are to provide for calling forth the militia -- And the President is to have the command; and, in conjunction with the Senate, to appoint the officers. The means ought to be commensurate to the end. The end is general protection. This cannot be effected without a general power to use the strength of the Union.

[On Standing Armies and Republican Government]

I most cordially agree with the Honorable Member last up, that a standing army is one of the greatest mischiefs that can possibly happen. It is a great recommendation for this system, that it provides against this evil more than any other system known to us, and particularly more than the old system of Confederation. The most effectual way to guard against a standing army, is to render it unnecessary. The most effectual way to render it unnecessary, is to give the General Government full power to call forth the militia, and exert the whole natural strength of the Union when necessary. Thus you will furnish the people with sure and certain protection, without recurring to this evil; and the certainty of this protection from the whole, will be a strong inducement to individual exertion. Does the organization of this Government warrant a belief that this power will be abused? Can we believe that a Government of a federal nature, consisting of many coequal sovereignties, and particularly having one branch chosen from the people, would drag the militia unnecessarily to an immense distance? This, Sir, would be unworthy the most arbitrary despot. They have no temptation whatever to abuse this power; such abuse could only answer the purpose of exciting the universal indignation of the people, and drawing on themselves the general hatred and detestation of their country. I cannot help thinking that the Honorable Gentleman has not considered in all its consequences, the amendment he has proposed. Would this be an equal protection, Sir? Or would it not be a most partial provision? Some States have three or four States in contact. Were this State invaded, as it is bounded by several States, the militia of three or four States would, by this proposition, be obliged to come to our aid; and those from some of the States would come a far greater distance than those of others. There are other States, which if invaded, could be assisted by the militia of one State only, there being several States which border but on one State. Georgia and New-Hampshire would be infinitely less safe than most of the other States. Were we to adopt this amendment, we should set up those states as butts for invasions, invite foreign enemies to attack them, and expose them to peculiar hardships and dangers. Were the militia confined to any limitted distance from their respective places of abode, it would produce equal, nay more, inconveniencies. The principles of equality and reciprocal aid would be destroyed in either case.

I cannot conceive that this Constitution, by giving the General Government the power of arming the militia, takes it away from the State Governments. The power is concurrent, and not exclusive. Have we not found from experience, that while the power of arming and governing of the militia has been solely vested in the State Legislatures, they were neglected and rendered unfit for immediate service? Every State neglected too much this most essential object -- But the General Government can do it more effectually. Have we not also found, that the militia of one State were almost always insufficient to succour its harassed neighbour? Did all the States furnish their quotas of militia, with sufficient promptitude? The assistance of one State will be of little avail to repel an invasion. But the general head of the whole Union can do it with effect, if it be vested with power to use the aggregate strength of the Union. If the regulation of the militia were to be committed to the Executive authority alone, there might be reason for providing restrictions. But, Sir, it is the Legislative authority that has this power. They must make a law for the purpose.

The Honorable Member is under another mistake. He wishes martial law to be exercised only in time of war, under an idea that Congress can establish it in time of peace. The States are to have the authority of training the militia according to the Congressional discipline; and of governing them at all times, when not in the service of the Union. Congress is to govern such part of them as may be employed in the actual service of the United States; and such part only can be subject to martial law. The Gentlemen in opposition have drawn a most tremendous picture of the Constitution in this respect. Without considering that the power was absolutely indispensible, they have alarmed us with the possible abuse of it; but have shewn no inducement or motive to tempt them to such abuse. Would the Legislature of this State drag the militia of the Eastern Shore to the Western frontiers, or those of the Western frontiers to the Eastern Shore, if the local militia were sufficient to effect the intended purpose? There is something so preposterous, and so full of mischief in the idea of dragging the militia unnecessarily from one end of the Continent to the other, that I think there can be no ground of apprehension. If you limit their power over the militia, you give them a pretext for substituting standing army. If you put it in the power of the State Governments to refuse the militia, by requiring their consent, you destroy the General Government, and sacrifice particular States. The same principles and motives which produced disobedience to requisitions, will produce refusal in this case.

The restrictions which the Honorable Gentleman mentioned to be in the British Constitution, are all provisions against the power of the Executive Magistrate. But the House of Commons may, if they be so disposed, sacrifice the interest of their constituents in all those cases. They may prolong the duration of mutiny bills, and grant supplies to the King to carry on an impolitic war. But they have no motives to do so. For they have strong motives to do their duty. We have more ample security than the people of Great-Britain. The powers of the Government are more limited and guarded, and our Representatives are more responsible than the Members of the British House of Commons.

[On Republican Government and the Experiment of Liberty]

The Honorable Member expresses surprise, that I wished to see an experiment made of a Republican Government; or, that I would risk the happiness of my country on an experiment. What is the situation of this country at this moment? Is it not rapidly approaching to anarchy? Are not the bands of the Union so absolutely relaxed as almost to amount to a dissolution? What has produced despotism and tyranny in other parts of the world? Is it not agreed upon all hands, that a reform is necessary? If any takes place, will it not be an experiment as well as this system? He acknowledges the existing system to be defective. He admits the necessity of some change. Would not the change he would chuse himself be also an experiment? He has repeated objections which have been already clearly refuted, and which I will therefore pass over. With respect to responsibility, still the Honorable Member thinks, that the House of Representatives and Senate will suffer by a comparison with the British Parliament. I will not repeat the contrast made before, which he has not mentioned. He tells us what may be done by our Representatives with respect to the admission to offices, and insinuates that less may be done in Great-Britain by the Members of Parliament. In this country, by this system, no new office can be taken by a Member of the Government, and if he takes an old one, he loses his seat. If the emoluments of any existing office be encreased, he cannot take it. How is it in Great-Britain? Any Member may have any place. For Parliament may create any new offices they please, or increase the emoluments of existing offices, and yet the Members may accept any such places. Any Member may accept any office whatever, and go again into Parliament. Does this comparison militate against this system? He tells us the affairs of our country are not alarming. I wish this assertion was well founded. I concur with him in rejoicing to see the people enlightened and vigilant. I should be happy to see the people paying respect to the laws and magistracy. But is respect paid to our laws? Every mans experience will tell him more perhaps than any thing I could say. Public and private confidence daily and rapidly decrease. Experiments must be made, and in that form which we must find most to the interest of our country.
