Speech at the Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829
=======================================================
Date: December 2, 1829
Source: Hunt Edition, The Writings of James Madison, Vol. 9

SPEECH IN THE VIRGINIA CONSTITUTIONAL
CONVENTION.1

December 2, 1829.

Although the actual posture of the subject before the Committee might admit a full
survey of it, it is not my purpose, in rising, to enter into the wide field of discussion,
which has called forth a display of intellectual resources and varied powers of
eloquence, that any country might be proud of, and which I have witnessed with the
highest gratification. Having been, for a very long period, withdrawn from any
participation in proceedings of deliberative bodies, and under other disqualifications
now of which I am deeply sensible, though perhaps less sensible than others may
perceive that I ought to be, I shall not attempt more than a few observations, which
may suggest the views I have taken of the subject, and which will consume but little
of the time of the Committee, become precious. It is sufficiently obvious, that persons
now and property are the two great subjects on which Governments are to act; and
that the rights of persons, and the rights of property, are the objects, for the protection
of which Government was instituted. These rights cannot well be separated. The
personal right to acquire property, which is a natural right, gives to property, when
acquired, a right to protection, as a social right. The essence of Government is power;
and power, lodged as it must be in human hands, will ever be liable to abuse. In
monarchies, the interests and happiness of all may be sacrificed to the caprice and
passions of a despot. In aristocracies, the rights and welfare of the many may be
sacrificed to the pride and cupidity of the few. In republics, the great danger is, that
the majority may not sufficiently respect the rights of the minority. Some gentlemen,
consulting the purity and generosity of their own minds, without adverting to the
lessons of experience, would find a security against that danger, in our social feelings;
in a respect for character; in the dictates of the monitor within; in the interests of
individuals; in the aggregate interests of the community. But man is known to be a
selfish, as well as a social being. Respect for character, though often a salutary
restraint, is but too often overruled by other motives. When numbers of men act in a
body, respect for character is often lost, just in proportion as it is necessary to control
what is not right. We all know that conscience is not a sufficient safe-guard; and
besides, that conscience itself may be deluded; may be misled, by an unconscious
bias, into acts which an enlightened conscience would forbid. As to the permanent
interest of individuals in the aggregate interests of the community, and in the
proverbial maxim, that honesty is the best policy, present temptation is often found to
be an overmatch for those considerations. These favourable attributes of the human
character are all valuable, as auxiliaries; but they will not serve as a substitute for the
coercive provision belonging to Government and Law. They will always, in
proportion as they prevail, be favourable to a mild administration of both: but they
can never be relied on as a guaranty of the rights of the minority against a majority
disposed to take unjust advantage of its power. The only effectual safeguard to the
rights of the minority, must be laid in such a basis and structure of the Government

itself, as may afford, in a certain degree, directly or indirectly, a defensive authority in
behalf of a minority having right on its side.

To come more nearly to the subject before the Committee, viz.: that peculiar feature
in our community, which calls for a peculiar division in the basis of our government, I
mean the coloured part of our population. It is apprehended, if the power of the
Commonwealth shall be in the hands of a majority, who have no interest in this
species of property, that, from the facility with which it may be oppressed by
excessive taxation, injustice may be done to its owners. It would seem, therefore, if
we can incorporate that interest into the basis of our system, it will be the most
apposite and effectual security that can be devised. Such an arrangement is
recommended to me by many very important considerations. It is due to justice; due
to humanity; due to truth; to the sympathies of our nature; in fine, to our character as a
people, both abroad and at home, that they should be considered, as much as possible,
in the light of human beings, and not as mere property. As such, they are acted upon
by our laws, and have an interest in our laws. They may be considered as making a
part, though a degraded part, of the families to which they belong.

If they had the complexion of the Serfs in the North of Europe, or of the Villeins
formerly in England; in other terms, if they were of our own complexion, much of the
difficulty would be removed. But the mere circumstance of complexion cannot
deprive them of the character of men. The Federal number, as it is called, is
particularly recommended to attention in forming a basis of Representation, by its
simplicity, its certainty, its stability, and its permanency. Other expedients for
securing justice in the case of taxation, while they amount in pecuniary effect, to the
same thing, have been found liable to great objections: and I do not believe that a
majority of this Convention is disposed to adopt them, it they can find a substitute
they can approve. Nor is it a small recommendation of the Federal number, in my
view, that it is in conformity to the ratio recognized in the Federal Constitution. The
cases, it is true, are not precisely the same, but there is more of analogy than might at
first be supposed. If the coloured population were equally diffused through the State,
the analogy would fail; but existing as it does, in large masses, in particular parts of it,
the distinction between the different parts of the State, resembles that between the
slave-holding and non-slave-holding States: and, if we reject a doctrine in our own
State, whilst we claim the benefit of it in our relations to other States, other
disagreeable consequences may be added to the charge of inconsistency, which will
be brought against us. If the example of our sister States is to have weight, we find
that in Georgia, the Federal number is made the basis of Representation in both
branches of their Legislature; and I do not learn, that any dissatisfaction or
inconvenience has flowed from its adoption. I wish we could know more of the
manner in which particular organizations of Government operate in other parts of the
United States. There would be less danger of being misled into error, and we should
have the advantage of their experience, as well as our own. In the case I mention,
there can, I believe, be no error.

Whether, therefore, we be fixing a basis of Representation, for the one branch or the
other of our Legislature, or for both, in a combination with other principles, the
Federal ratio is a favourite resource with me. It entered into my earliest views of the

subject, before this Convention was assembled: and though I have kept my mind
open, have listened to every proposition which has been advanced, and given to them
all a candid consideration, I must say, that in my judgment, we shall act wisely in
preferring it to others, which have been brought before us. Should the Federal number
be made to enter into the basis in one branch of the Legislature, and not into the other,
such an arrangement might prove favourable to the slaves themselves. It may be, and I
think it has been suggested, that those who have themselves no interest in this species
of property, are apt to sympathise with the slaves, more than may be the case with
their masters; and would, therefore, be disposed, when they had the ascendancy, to
protect them from laws of an oppressive character, whilst the masters, who have a
common interest with the slaves, against undue taxation, which must be paid out of
their labour, will be their protectors when they have the ascendancy.

The Convention is now arrived at a point, where we must agree on some common
ground, all sides relaxing in their opinions, not changing, but mutually surrendering a
part of them. In framing a Constitution, great difficulties are necessarily to be
overcome; and nothing can ever overcome them, but a spirit of compromise. Other
nations are surprised at nothing so much as our having been able to form
Constitutions in the manner which has been exemplified in this country. Even the
union of so many States, is, in the eyes of the world, a wonder; the harmonious
establishment of a common Government over them all, a miracle. I cannot but flatter
myself, that without a miracle, we shall be able to arrange all difficulties. I never have
despaired, notwithstanding all the threatening appearances we have passed through. I
have now more than a hope—a consoling confidence, that we shall at last find, that
our labours have not been in vain.