On Judicial Power and the National Government
James Madison, Virginia Ratifying Convention
June 19-20, 1788

Source: Elliot's Debates, Vol. 3; Papers of James Madison, Vol. 11 (Founders Online: 01-11-02-0101)
Transcribed from Robertson's Debates, ConSource.org, and UChicago Founders' Constitution

---

JUNE 19

[Demanding Clarification from Mason]

Here Mr. Madison interrupted Mr. Mason, and demanded an unequivocal explanation. As those insinuations might create a belief, that every member of the late federal convention was of that opinion, he wished him to tell who the gentlemen were to whom he alluded.

Mr. Madison declared himself satisfied with this, unless the committee thought themselves entitled to ask a further explanation.

JUNE 20

[On the Organization of the Executive]

It may be proper to remark, that the organization of the general government for the United States, was, in all its parts, very difficult. There was a peculiar difficulty in that of the Executive. Every thing incident to it, must have participated of that difficulty. That mode which was judged most expedient was adopted, till experience should point out one more eligible. The difficulty of providing for this case, is not to be paralleled by any that may attend the determination of most questions. The difficulty of the subject was felt by the convention, and as the modification of it must have been influenced by a variety of political considerations, I will not presume that it is perfect.

[On Judicial Compensation]

His criticism is that the judiciary has not been guarded from an increase of the salary, and that their compensations may be augmented during their continuance in office. I wished myself to insert a restraint on the augmentation as well as diminution of their compensations; and supported it in the convention. But I was overruled. The business must increase. If there was no power to increase their pay, according to the increase of business, during the life of the judges, it might happen, that there would be such an accumulation of business, as would reduce the pay to a most trivial consideration.

[On Jury Trial Provisions]

I have observed, that gentlemen suppose, that the general legislature will do every mischief they possibly can, and that they will omit to do every thing good which they are authorised to do. If this were a reasonable supposition, their objections would be good. I consider it reasonable to conclude, that they will as readily do their duty, as deviate from it: Nor do I go on the grounds mentioned by gentlemen on the other side -- that we are to place unlimited confidence in them, and expect nothing but the most exalted integrity and sublime virtue. But I go on this great republican principle, that the people will have virtue and intelligence to select men of virtue and wisdom. Is there no virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoretical checks -- no form of government can render us secure. To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea. If there be sufficient virtue and intelligence in the community, it will be exercised in the selection of these men. So that we do not depend on their virtue, or put confidence in our rulers, but in the people who are to choose them.

[On Locality of Jury Trials]

Suppose a rebellion in a whole district, would it not be impossible to get a jury? The trial by jury is held as sacred in England as in America. There are deviations of it in England; yet greater deviations have taken place here, since we established our independence, than have taken place there for a long time, though it be left to the legislative discretion. It is a misfortune in any case that this trial should be departed from, yet in some cases it is necessary. It must be therefore left to the discretion of the legislature to modify it according to circumstances. This is a complete and satisfactory answer.
