On the Power of Congress to Direct Military Forces and the Militia
James Madison, Virginia Ratifying Convention
June 16, 1788

Source: Elliot's Debates, Vol. 3; Papers of James Madison, Vol. 11 (Founders Online: 01-11-02-0087, 01-11-02-0088)
Transcribed from Robertson's Debates and ConSource.org

---

[On the Necessity of Federal Military Power]

Mr. Madison. Mr. Chairman. I will endeavor to follow the rule of the House; but must pay due attention to the observations which fell from the Gentleman. I should conclude, from abstracted reasoning, that they were ill founded. I should think, that if there were any object, which the General Government ought to command, it would be the direction of the national forces. And as the force which lies in militia is most safe, the direction of that part ought to be submitted to, in order to render another force unnecessary. The power objected to is necessary, because it is to be employed for national purposes. It is necessary to be given to every Government. This is not opinion, but fact. The highest authority may be given; That the want of such authority in the Government protracted the late war, and prolonged its calamities.

He says, that one ground of complaint at the beginning of the revolution, was, that a standing army was quartered upon us. This was not the whole complaint. We complained because it was done without the local authority of this country -- without the consent of the people of America. As to the exclusion of standing armies in the Bills of Rights of the States, we shall find, that though in one or two of them, there is something like a prohibition, yet in most of them it is only provided, that no armies shall be kept up without the Legislative authority; that is, without the consent of the community itself. Where is the impropriety of saying we shall have an army if necessary? Does not the notoriety of this constitute security? If inimical nations were to fall upon us when defenceless, what would be the consequence? Would it be wise to say, that we should have no defence? Give me leave to say, that the only possible way to provide against standing armies, is, to make them unnecessary. The way to do this, is to organize and discipline our militia, so as to render them capable of defending the country against external invasions, and internal insurrections. But it is urged, that abuses may happen. How is it possible to answer objections against possibility of abuses? It must strike every logical reasoner, that these cannot be entirely provided against. I really thought that the objection to the militia was at an end. Was there ever a Constitution, in which, if authority was vested, it must not have been executed by force, if resisted? Was it not in the contemplation of this State, when contemptuous proceedings were expected, to recur to something of this kind? How is it possible to have a more proper resource than this? That the laws of every country ought to be executed, cannot be denied. That force must be used if necessary, cannot be denied. Can any Government be established, that will answer any purpose whatever, unless force be provided for executing its laws? The Constitution does not say that a standing army shall be called out to execute the laws. Is not this a more proper way? The militia ought to be called forth to suppress smugglers. Will this be denied? The case actually happened at Alexandria. There were a number of smugglers, who were too formidable for the civil power to overcome. The militia quelled the sailors, who, otherwise, would have perpetrated their intentions. Should a number of smugglers have a number of ships, the militia ought to be called forth to quell them. We do not know but what there may be combinations of smugglers in Virginia hereafter. We all know the use made of the Isle of Man. It was a general depositary of contraband goods. The Parliament found the evil so great, as to render it necessary to wrest it out of the hands of its possessor.

The Honorable Gentleman says, it is a Government of force. If he means military force, the clause under consideration proves the contrary. There never was a Government without force. What is the meaning of Government? An institution to make people do their duty. A Government leaving it to a man to do his duty, or not, as he pleases, would be a new species of Government, or rather no Government at all. The ingenuity of the Gentleman is remarkable, in introducing the riot-act of Great-Britain. That act has no connection, or analogy, to any regulation of the militia: Nor is there any thing in the Constitution to warrant the General Government to make such an act. It never was a complaint in Great-Britain, that the militia could be called forth. If riots should happen, the militia are proper to quell it, to prevent a resort to another mode. As to the infliction of ignominious punishments, we have no ground of alarm, if we consider the circumstances of the people at large. There will be no punishments so ignominious as have been inflicted already. The militia law of every State to the north of Maryland, is less rigorous than the particular law of this State. If a change be necessary to be made by the General Government, it will be in our favor. I think that the people of those States would not agree to be subjected to a more harsh punishment than their own militia laws inflict. An observation fell from a Gentleman, on the same side with myself, which deserves to be attended to. If we be dissatisfied with the national Government -- If we should choose to renounce it, this is an additional safe-guard to our defence. I conceive that we are peculiarly interested in giving the General Government as extensive means as possible to protect us. If there be a particular discrimination between places in America, the Southern States are, from their situation and circumstances, most interested in giving the national Government the power of protecting its members.

An act passed a few years ago, in this State, to enable the Government to call forth the militia to enforce the laws, when a powerful combination should take place to oppose them. This is the same power which the Constitution is to have. There is a great deal of difference between calling forth the militia, when a combination is formed to prevent the execution of the laws, and the Sheriff or Constable carrying with him a body of militia to execute them in the first instance; which is a construction not warranted by the clause. There is an act also in this State, empowering the officers of the customs to summon any persons to assist them when they meet with obstruction in executing their duty. This shews the necessity of giving the Government power to call forth the militia when the laws are resisted. It is a power vested in every Legislature in the Union, and which is necessary to every Government. He then moved, that the Clerk should read those acts -- which were accordingly read.

[On State vs. Federal Militia Authority]

The obvious explanation was, that the States were to appoint the officers, and govern all the militia except that part which was called into the actual service of the United States. He asked, if powers were given to the General Government, if we must not give it executive power to use it? The vice of the old system was, that Congress could not execute the powers nominally vested in them. If the contested clause were expunged, this system would have nearly the same defect.

The State Governments might do what they thought proper with the militia, when they were not in the actual service of the United States. They might make use of them to suppress insurrections, quell riots, &c. and call on the General Government for the militia of any other State to aid them if necessary.

[On Where the Power Must Be Lodged]

Mr. Madison. Mr. Chairman. Let me ask this Committee, and the Honorable Member last up, what we are to understand from this reasoning? The power must be vested in Congress, or in the State Governments; or there must be a division or concurrence. He is against division -- It is a political monster. He will not give it to Congress for fear of oppression. Is it to be vested in the State Governments? If so, where is the provision for general defence? If ever America should be attacked, the States would fall successively. It will prevent them from giving aid to their sister States. For, as each State will expect to be attacked, and wish to guard against it, each will retain its own militia for its own defence. Where is this power to be deposited then, unless in the General Government, if it be dangerous to the public safety to give it exclusively to the States? If it must be divided, let him shew a better manner of doing it than that which is in the Constitution. I cannot agree with the other Honorable Gentleman, that there is no check. There is a powerful check in that paper. The State Governments are to govern the militia, when not called forth for general national purposes; and Congress is to govern such part only as may be in the actual service of the Union. Nothing can be more certain and positive than this. It expressly empowers Congress to govern them when in the service of the United States. It is then clear, that the States govern them when they are not. With respect to suppressing insurrections, I say that those clauses which were mentioned by the Honorable Gentleman, are compatible with a concurrence of the power. By the first, Congress is to call them forth to suppress insurrections and repel invasions of foreign powers. A concurrence in the former case is necessary, because a whole State may be in insurrection against the Union. What has passed will perhaps justify this apprehension. The safety of the Union, and particular States, requires that the General Government should have power to repel foreign invasions. The fourth section, of the fourth article, is perfectly consistent with the exercise of the power by the States. The words are, "The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union, a Republican form of Government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and on application of the Legislature, or of the Executive, (when the Legislature cannot be convened) against domestic violence." The word invasion here, after power had been given in the former clause to repel invasions, may be thought tautologous, but it has a different meaning from the other. This clause speaks of a particular State. It means that it shall be protected from invasion by other States. A Republican Government is to be guaranteed to each State, and they are to be protected from invasion from other States, as well as from foreign powers: And on application by the Legislature or Executive, as the case may be, the militia of other States are to be called to suppress domestic insurrections. Does this bar the States from calling forth their own militia? No. But it gives them a supplementary security to suppress insurrections and domestic violence.

The other clause runs in these words, "No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty on tonnage, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay." They are restrained from making war, unless invaded, or in imminent danger. When in such danger, they are not restrained. I can perceive no competition in these clauses. They cannot be said to be repugnant to a concurrence of the power. If we object to the Constitution in this manner, and consume our time in verbal criticism, we shall never put an end to the business.

[On the Ten Miles Square -- Federal District]

Mr. Madison. Mr. Chairman. I did conceive, Sir, that the clause under consideration, was one of those parts which would speak its own praise. It is hardly necessary to say any thing concerning it. Strike it out of the system, and let me ask, whether there would not be much larger scope for those dangers? I cannot comprehend that the power of legislating over a small district, which cannot exceed ten miles square, and may not be more than one mile, will involve the dangers which he apprehends. If there be any knowledge in my mind, of the nature of man, I should think it would be the last thing that would enter into the mind of any man, to grant exclusive advantages in a very circumscribed district to the prejudice of the community at large. We make suppositions, and afterwards deduce conclusions from them, as if they were established axioms. But after all, bring home this question to yourselves. Is it probable that the Members from Georgia, New-Hampshire, &c. will concur to sacrifice the privileges of their friends? I believe, that whatever State may become the seat of the General Government, it will become the object of the jealousy, and of the envy of the other States. Let me remark, if not already remarked, that there must be a particular cession by particular States, of the district to Congress, and that the States may settle the terms of the cession. The States may make what stipulation they please in it, and if they apprehend any danger, they may refuse it altogether. How could the General Government be guarded from the undue influence of particular States, or from insults, without such exclusive power? If it were at the pleasure of a particular State to controul the session and deliberations of Congress, would they be secure from insults or the influence of such State? If this Commonwealth depended for the freedom of deliberation, on the laws of any State where it might be necessary to sit, would it not be liable to attacks of that nature (and with more indignity) which has been already offered to Congress? With respect to the Government of Holland, I believe the States General have no jurisdiction over the Hague. But I have heard that mentioned as a circumstance which gave undue influence to Holland over the rest. We must limit our apprehensions to certain degrees of probability. The evils which they urge must result from this clause, are extremely improbable: Nay, almost impossible.
