On the Method of Electing the President, the Pardoning Power, and Treaty Power
James Madison, Virginia Ratifying Convention
June 18, 1788

Source: Elliot's Debates, Vol. 3; Papers of James Madison, Vol. 11 (Founders Online: 01-11-02-0096, 01-11-02-0097)
Transcribed from Robertson's Debates and ConSource.org

---

[On Presidential Election]

Mr. Chairman. I will take the liberty of making a few observations which may place this in such a light as may obviate objections. It is observable, that none of the Honorable Members objecting to this, have pointed out the right mode of election. It was found difficult in the Convention, and will be found so by any Gentleman who will take the liberty of delineating a mode of electing the President, that would exclude those inconveniences which they apprehend. I would not contend against some of the principles laid down by some Gentlemen if the interests of some States only were to be consulted. But there is a great diversity of interests. The choice of the people ought to be attended to. I have found no better way of selecting the man in whom they place the highest confidence, than that delineated in the plan of the Convention -- nor has the Gentleman told us. Perhaps it will be found impracticable to elect him by the immediate suffrages of the people. Difficulties would arise from the extent and population of the States. Instead of this, the people choose the Electors. This can be done with ease and convenience, and will render the choice more judicious. As to the eventual voting by States, it has my approbation. The lesser States, and some large States, will be generally pleased by that mode. The Deputies from the small States argued, (and there is some force in their reasoning) that when the people voted, the large States evidently had the advantage over the rest, and without varying the mode, the interests of the little States might be neglected or sacrificed. Here is a compromise. For in the eventual election, the small States will have the advantage. In so extensive a country, it is probable that many persons will be voted for, and the lowest of the five highest on the list may not be so inconsiderable as he supposes. With respect to the possibility, that a small number of votes may decide his election, I do not know how, nor do I think that a bare calculation of possibility ought to govern us. One Honorable Gentleman has said, that the Eastern States may, in the eventual election, choose him. But in the extravagant calculation he has made, he has been obliged to associate North-Carolina and Georgia, with the five smallest Northern States. There can be no union of interests or sentiments between States so differently situated.

[On the Electoral Vote Requirement]

The Honorable Member last up has committed a mistake in saying, there must be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed. A majority of votes, equal to a majority of the Electors appointed, will be sufficient. Forty-six is a majority of ninety-one, and will suffice to elect the President.

I am surprised that the Honorable Member has not pointed out a more proper mode, since he objects to this.

Expressed astonishment at the construction of the Honorable Member, and insisted, that nothing was necessary but a number of votes equal to a majority of the Electors, which was forty-six. For the clause expressly said, that "The person having the greatest number of votes shall be President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed." Each had two votes, because one vote was intended for the Vice President.

[On the Diversity of State Interests]

But the Honorable Gentleman tells us, that the President and Senate will be in alliance against the Representatives, and that from the advantage of the few over the many, they may seduce, or over-rule the Representatives. But if this be the case, how can he contend for the augmentation of the number of the latter? For the more you increase their number, the more danger in the disproportion. The diversity of circumstances, situation and extent of the different States, will render a previous combination, with respect to the election of the President, impossible.

[On the Pardoning Power]

Mr. Madison, adverting to Mr. Mason's objection to the President's power of pardoning, said, it would be extremely improper to vest it in the House of Representatives, and not much less so to place it in the Senate; because numerous bodies were actuated more or less by passion, and might in the moment of vengeance forget humanity. It was an established practice in Massachusetts for the Legislature to determine in such cases. It was found, says he, that two different sessions, before each of which the question came, with respect to pardoning the delinquents of the rebellion, were governed precisely by different sentiments -- the one would execute with universal vengeance, and the other would extend general mercy.

There is one security in this case to which Gentlemen may not have adverted: If the President be connected in any suspicious manner with any persons, and there be grounds to believe he will shelter himself; the House of Representatives can impeach him: They can remove him if found guilty: They can suspend him when suspected, and the power will devolve on the Vice-President: Should he be suspected also, he may likewise be suspended till he be impeached and removed, and the Legislature may make a temporary appointment. This is a great security.

The Honorable Member had misunderstood the fact: For the first Assembly was after the rebellion was over. The decision must have been improper in one or the other case. It marks this important truth, says he, that numerous bodies of men are improper to exercise this power. The universal experience of mankind proves it.

[On the Treaty Power]

Mr. Madison, instead of being alarmed, had no doubt but the Constitution would increase, rather than decrease, the security of territorial rights and commercial advantages, as it would augment the strength and respectability of the country. The Honorable Gentleman, says he, has said we are making great innovations in extending the force of treaties. Are not treaties the law of the land in England? I will refer you to a book which is in every man's hand -- Blackstone's Commentaries. It will inform you that treaties made by the King are to be the supreme law of the land. If they are to have any efficacy, they must be the law of the land: They are so in every country. He thinks that by the power of making treaties, the empire may be dismembered in time of peace. The King of Great-Britain has the power of making peace, but he has no power of dismembering the empire, or alienating any part of it. Nay, the King of France has no right of alienating any part of his dominions, to any power whatsoever. The power of making treaties does not involve a right of dismembering the Union.

Mr. Madison conceived, that as far as the King of Great-Britain had a constitutional power of making a treaty, such a treaty was binding. He did not say that his power was unlimited. One exception was, that he could not dismember the empire.

[On Treaty Security]

Mr. Madison thought it astonishing that Gentlemen should think, that a treaty could be got with surprise, or that foreign nations should be solicitous to get a treaty only ratified by the Senators of a few States. Were the President to commit any thing so attrocious as to summon only a few States, he would be impeached and convicted, as a majority of the States would be affected by his misdemeanor.
