CHURCH ESTABLISHMENT — PETITION TO THE VIRGINIA GENERAL ASSEMBLY
James Madison
1786

Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, vol. 2 (1783-1787), p. 143

---

CHURCH ESTABLISHMENT. TO THE HOLE THE SPEAKER & GENTLEMEN THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF VIRGINIA. (1786.)

We the subscribers members of the protestant episcopal Church claim the attention of
your honourable Body to our objections to the law passed at the last Session of
Assembly for incorporating the protestant Episcopal church; and we remonstrate
against the said law—

Because the law admits the power of the Legislative Body to interfere in matters of
Religion which we think is not included in their jurisdiction.

Because the law was passed on the petition of some of the Clergy of the Protestant
Episcopal Church without any application from the other members of that Church on
whom the law is to operate, and we conceive it to be highly improper that the
Legislature should regard as the sense of the whole Church the opinion of a few
interested members who were in most instances originally imposed on the people
without their consent & who were not authorized by even the smallest part of this
community to make such a proposition.

Because the law constitutes the Clergy members of a convention who are to legislate
for the laity contrary to their fundamental right of chusing their own Legislators.

Because by that law the most obnoxious & unworthy Clergyman cannot be removed
from a parish except by the determination of a body, one half of whom the people
have no confidence in & who will always have the same interest with the minister
whose conduct they are to judge of.

Because—by that law power is given to the convention to regulate matters of faith &
the obsequious vestries are to engage to change their opinions as often as the
convention shall alter theirs.

Because a system so absurd and servile will drive the members of the Episcopal
Church over to the Sects where there will be more consistency & liberty.

We therefore hope that the wisdom & impartiality of the present assembly will incline
them to repeal a law so pregnant with mischief & injustice.
