Report of 1800 (Report on the Virginia Resolutions)
James Madison
January 7, 1800
Virginia House of Delegates, Session of 1799-1800

Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, Vol. 6 (1790-1802)

---

REPORT ON THE RESOLUTIONS

House of Delegates, Session of 1799-1800.

Report of the Committee to whom were referred the Communications of various
States, relative to the Resolutions of the last General Assembly of this State,
concerning the Alien and Sedition Laws.

Whatever room might be found in the proceedings of some of the States, who have
disapproved of the resolutions of the General Assembly of this Commonwealth,
passed on the 21st day of December, 1798, for painful remarks on the spirit and
manner of those proceedings, it appears to the committee most consistent with the
duty, as well as dignity, of the General Assembly, to hasten an oblivion of every
circumstance which might be construed into a diminution of mutual respect,
confidence, and affection among the members of the Union.

The committee have deemed it a more useful task to revise, with a critical eye, the
resolutions which have met with this disapprobation; to examine fully the several
objections and arguments which have appeared against them; and to inquire whether
there be any errors of fact, of principle, or of reasoning, which the candor of the
General Assembly ought to acknowledge and correct.

The first of the resolutions is in the words following:

“Resolved, That the General Assembly of Virginia doth unequivocally express a firm
resolution to maintain and defend the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of this State against every aggression, either foreign or domestic, and that
they will support the Government of the United States in all measures warranted by
the former.”

No unfavorable comment can have been made on the sentiments here expressed. To
maintain and defend the Constitution of the United States, and of their own State,
against every aggression, both foreign and domestic, and to support the Government
of the United States in all measures warranted by their Constitution, are duties which
the General Assembly ought always to feel, and to which, on such an occasion, it was
evidently proper to express their sincere and firm adherence.

In their next resolution—

“The General Assembly most solemnly declares a warm attachment to the Union of
the States, to maintain which it pledges all its powers; and that for this end it is their
duty to watch over and oppose every infraction of those principles which constitute
the only basis of that Union, because a faithful observance of them can alone secure
its existence, and the public happiness.”


The observation just made is equally applicable to this solemn declaration of warm
attachment to the Union, and this solemn pledge to maintain it; nor can any question
arise among enlightened friends of the Union, as to the duty of watching over and
opposing every infraction of those principles which constitute its basis, and a faithful
observance of which can alone secure its existence, and the public happiness thereon
depending.

The third resolution is in the words following:

“That this Assembly doth explicitly and peremptorily declare, that it views the powers
of the Federal Government as resulting from the compact to which the States are
parties, as limited by the plain sense and intention of the instrument constituting that
compact—as no further valid than they are authorized by the grants enumerated in
that compact; and that in case of a deliberate, palpable, and dangerous exercise of
other powers, not granted by the said compact, the States who are parties thereto have
the right and are in duty bound to interpose for arresting the progress of the evil, and
for maintaining within their respective limits the authorities, rights, and liberties
appertaining to them.”

On this resolution the committee have bestowed all the attention which its importance
merits. They have scanned it not merely with a strict, but with a severe eye; and they
feel confidence in pronouncing that, in its just and fair construction, it is
unexceptionably true in its several positions, as well as constitutional and conclusive
in its inferences.

The resolution declares, first, that “it views the powers of the Federal Government as
resulting from the compact to which the States are parties”; in other words, that the
Federal powers are derived from the Constitution; and that the Constitution is a
compact to which the States are parties.

Clear as the position must seem, that the Federal powers are derived from the
Constitution, and from that alone, the committee are not unapprized of a late doctrine
which opens another source of Federal powers not less extensive and important than it
is new and unexpected. The examination of this doctrine will be most conveniently
connected with a review of a succeeding resolution. The committee satisfy themselves
here with briefly, remarking, that in all the contemporary discussions and comments
which the Constitution underwent, it was constantly justified and recommended on
the ground that the powers not given to the Government were withheld from it, and
that if any doubt could have existed on this subject, under the original text of the
Constitution, it is removed, as far as words could remove it, by the 12th amendment,
now a part of the Constitution, which expressly declares “that the powers not
delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States,
are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.”

The other position involved in this branch of the resolution, namely, “that the States
are parties to the Constitution” or compact, is, in the judgment of the committee,
equally free from objection. It is indeed true that the term “States” is sometimes used
in a vague sense, and sometimes in different senses, according to the subject to which


it is applied. Thus, it sometimes means the separate sections of territory occupied by
the political societies within each; sometimes the particular governments established
by those societies; sometimes those societies as organized into those particular
governments; and, lastly, it means the people composing those political societies, in
their highest sovereign capacity. Although it might be wished that the perfection of
language admitted less diversity in the signification of the same words, yet little
inconvenience is produced by it where the true sense can be collected with certainty
from the different applications. In the present instance, whatever different
construction of the term “States,” in the resolution, may have been entertained, all will
at least concur in that last mentioned; because in that sense the Constitution was
submitted to the “States”; in that sense the “States” ratified it; and in that sense of the
term “States” they are consequently parties to the compact from which the powers of
the Federal Government result.

The next position is, that the General Assembly views the powers of the Federal
Government “as limited by the plain sense and intention of the instrument constituting
that compact,” and “as no farther valid than they are authorized by the grants therein
enumerated.” It does not seem possible that any just objection can lie against either of
these causes. The first amounts merely to a declaration that the compact ought to have
the interpretation plainly intended by the parties to it; the other, to a declaration that it
ought to have the execution and effect intended by them. If the powers granted be
valid, it is solely because they are granted; and if the granted powers are valid because
granted, all other powers not granted must not be valid.

The resolution having taken this view of the Federal compact, proceeds to infer “that,
in case of a deliberate, palpable, and dangerous exercise of other powers, not granted
by the said compact, the States who are parties thereto have the right and are in duty
bound to interpose for arresting the progress of the evil, and for maintaining within
their respective limits the authorities, rights, and liberties appertaining to them.”

It appears to your committee to be a plain principle, founded in common sense,
illustrated by common practice, and essential to the nature of compacts, that where
resort can be had to no tribunal superior to the authority of the parties, the parties
themselves must be the rightful judges, in the last resort, whether the bargain made
has been pursued or violated. The Constitution of the United States was formed by the
sanction of the States, given by each in its sovereign capacity. It adds to the stability
and dignity, as well as to the authority of the Constitution, that it rests on this
legitimate and solid foundation. The States then, being the parties to the constitutional
compact, and in their sovereign capacity, it follows of necessity that there can be no
tribunal above their authority to decide, in the last resort, whether the compact made
by them be violated; and, consequently, that, as the parties to it, they must themselves
decide, in the last resort, such questions as may be of sufficient magnitude to require
their interposition.

It does not follow, however, because the States, as sovereign parties to their
constitutional compact, must ultimately decide whether it has been violated, that such
a decision ought to be interposed either in a hasty manner or on doubtful and inferior
occasions. Even in the case of ordinary conventions between different nations, where,


by the strict rule of interpretation, a breach of a part may be deemed a breach of the
whole—every part being deemed a condition of every other part, and of the whole—it
is always laid down that the breach must be both wilful and material, to justify an
application of the rule. But in the case of an intimate and constitutional union, like
that of the United States, it is evident that the interposition of the parties, in their
sovereign capacity, can be called for by occasions only deeply essentially affecting
the vital principles of their political system.

The resolution has, accordingly, guarded against any misapprehension of its object, by
expressly requiring for such an interposition “the case of a deliberate, palpable, and
dangerous breach of the Constitution by the exercise of powers not granted by it.” It
must be a case, not of a light and transient nature, but of a nature dangerous to the
great purposes for which the Constitution was established. It must be a case,
moreover, not obscure or doubtful in its construction, but plain and palpable. Lastly it
must be a case not resulting from a partial consideration or hasty determination, but a
case stamped with a final consideration and deliberate adherence. It is not necessary,
because the resolution does not require, that the question should be discussed, how far
the exercise of any particular power, ungranted by the Constitution, would justify the
interposition of the parties to it. As cases might easily be stated which none would
contend ought to fall within that description, cases, on the other hand, might with
equal ease be stated, so flagrant and so fatal as to unite every opinion in placing them
within the description.

But the resolution has done more than guard against misconstruction, by expressly
referring to cases of a deliberate, palpable, and dangerous nature. It specifies the
object of the interposition which it contemplates to be solely that of arresting the
progress of the evil of usurpation, and of maintaining the authorities, rights, and
liberties appertaining to the States as parties to the Constitution.

From this view of the resolution it would seem inconceivable that it can incur any just
disapprobation from those who, laying aside all momentary impressions, and
recollecting the genuine source and object of the Federal Constitution, shall candidly
and accurately interpret the meaning of the General Assembly. If the deliberate
exercise of dangerous powers, palpably withheld by the Constitution, could not justify
the parties to it in interposing even so far as to arrest the progress of the evil, and
thereby to preserve the Constitution itself, as well as to provide for the safety of the
parties to it, there would be an end to all relief from usurped power, and a direct
subversion of the rights specified or recognized under all the State constitutions, as
well as a plain denial of the fundamental principle on which our independence itself
was declared.

But it is objected that the judicial authority is to be regarded as the sole expositor of
the Constitution, in the last resort; and it may be asked for what reason the declaration
by the General Assembly, supposing it to be theoretically true, could be required at
the present day, and in so solemn a manner.

On this objection it might be observed, first, that there may be instances of usurped
power, which the forms of the Constitution would never draw within the control of


the judicial department; secondly, that if the decision of the judiciary be raised above
the authority of the sovereign parties to the Constitution, the decisions of the other
departments, not carried by the forms of the Constitution before the judiciary, must be
equally authoritative and final with the decisions of that department. But the proper
answer to the objection, is that the resolution of the General Assembly relates to those
great and extraordinary cases in which all the forms of the Constitution may prove
ineffectual against infractions dangerous to the essential rights of the parties to it. The
resolution supposes that dangerous powers, not delegated, may not only be usurped
and executed by the other departments, but that the judicial department also may
exercise or sanction dangerous powers beyond the grant of the Constitution, and,
consequently, that the ultimate right of the parties to the Constitution to judge whether
the compact has been dangerously violated, must extend to violations by one
delegated authority as well as by another; by the judiciary as well as by the executive
or the legislature.

However true, therefore, it may be that the judicial department is, in all questions
submitted to it by the forms of the Constitution, to decide in the last resort, this resort
must necessarily be deemed the last in relation to the authorities of the other
departments of the Government; not in relation to the rights of the parties to the
constitutional compact, from which the judicial as well as the other departments hold
their delegated trusts. On any other hypothesis, the delegation of judicial power would
annual the authority delegating it; and the concurrence of this department with the
others in usurped powers might subvert forever, and beyond the possible reach of any
rightful remedy, the very Constitution which all were instituted to preserve.

The truth declared in the resolution being established, the expediency of making the
declaration at the present day may safely be left to the temperate consideration and
candid judgment of the American public. It will be remembered that a frequent
recurrence to fundamental principles is solemnly enjoined by most of the State
constitutions, and particularly by our own, as a necessary safeguard against the danger
of degeneracy to which republics are liable, as well as other governments, though in a
less degree than others. And a fair comparison of the political doctrines not
unfrequent at the present day with those which characterized the epoch of our
Revolution, and which form the basis of our republican constitutions, will best
determine whether the declaratory recurrence here made to those principles ought to
be viewed as unseasonable and improper, or as a vigilant discharge of an important
duty. The authority of constitutions over governments, and of the sovereignty of the
people over constitutions, are truths which are at all times necessary to be kept in
mind, and at no time, perhaps, more necessary than at present.

The fourth resolution stands as follows:

“That the General Assembly doth also express its deep regret that a spirit has in
sundry instances been manifested by the Federal Government to enlarge its powers by
forced constructions of the constitutional charter which defines them; and that
indications have appeared of a design to expound certain general phrases, (which,
having been copied from the very limited grant of powers in the former articles of
Confederation, were the less liable to be misconstrued,) so as to destroy the meaning


and effect of the particular enumeration which necessarily explains and limits the
general phrases, and so as to consolidate the States by degrees into one sovereignty,
the obvious tendency and inevitable result of which would be to transform the present
republican system of the United States into an absolute, or at best a mixed,
monarchy.”

The first question here to be considered is, whether a spirit has, in sundry instances,
been manifested by the Federal Government to enlarge its powers by forced
constructions of the constitutional charter.

The General Assembly having declared their opinion merely by regretting, in general
terms, that forced constructions for enlarging the Federal powers have taken place, it
does not appear to the committee necessary to go into a specification of every instance
to which the resolution may allude. The Alien and Sedition Acts being particularly
named in a succeeding resolution, are of course to be understood as included in the
allusion. Omitting others which have less occupied public attention, or been less
extensively regarded as unconstitutional, the resolution may be presumed to refer
particularly to the Bank Law, which, from the circumstances of its passage, as well as
the latitude of construction on which it is founded, strikes the attention with singular
force; and the Carriage Tax, distinguished also by circumstances in its history having
a similar tendency. Those instances alone, if resulting from forced construction, and
calculated to enlarge the powers of the Federal Government, as the committee cannot
but conceive to be the case, sufficiently warrant this part of the resolution. The
committee have not thought it incumbent on them to extend their attention to laws
which have been objected to, rather as varying the constitutional distribution of
powers in the Federal Government, than as an absolute enlargement of them; because
instances of this sort, however important in their principles and tendencies, do not
appear to fall strictly within the text under review.

The other questions presenting themselves are—1. Whether indications have appeared
of a design to expound certain general phrases copied from the “Articles of
Confederation,” so as to destroy the effect of the particular enumeration explaining
and limiting their meaning. 2. Whether this exposition would by degrees consolidate
the States into one sovereignty. 3. Whether the tendency and result of this
consolidation would be to transform the republican system of the United States into a
monarchy.

1. The general phrases here meant, must be those “of providing for the common
defence and general welfare.”

In the “Articles of Confederation,” the phrases are used as follows, in Article VIII:
“All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred for the common
defence and general welfare, and allowed by the United States in Congress
assembled, shall be defrayed out of the common treasury, which shall be supplied by
the several States in proportion to the value of all land within each State, granted to or
surveyed for any person, as such land and the buildings and improvements thereon
shall be estimated, according to such mode as the United States, in Congress
assembled, shall from time to time direct and appoint.”


In the existing Constitution they make the following part of Section 8: “The Congress
shall have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts
and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the United States.”

This similarity in the use of these phrases, in the two great Federal charters, might
well be considered as rendering their meaning less liable to be misconstrued in the
latter; because it will scarcely be said that in the former they were ever understood to
be either a general grant of power, or to authorize the requisition or application of
money by the old Congress to the common defence and general welfare, except in the
cases afterwards enumerated, which explained and limited their meaning; and if such
was the limited meaning attached to these phrases in the very instrument revised and
re-modeled by the present Constitution, it can never be supposed that, when copied
into this Constitution, a different meaning ought to be attached to them.

That, notwithstanding this remarkable security against misconstruction, a design has
been indicated to expound these phrases in the Constitution so as to destroy the effect
of the particular enumeration of powers by which it explains and limits them, must
have fallen under the observation of those who have attended to the course of public
transactions. Not to multiply proofs on this subject, it will suffice to refer to the
Debates of the Federal Legislature, in which arguments have on different occasions
been drawn, with apparent effect, from these phrases in their indefinite meaning.

To these indications might be added, without looking further, the official Report on
Manufactures, by the late Secretary of the Treasury, made on the 5th of December,
1791, and the Report of a Committee of Congress, in January, 1797, on the promotion
of Agriculture. In the first of these it is expressly contended to belong “to the
discretion of the National Legislature to pronounce upon the objects which concern
the general welfare, and for which, under that description, an appropriation of money
is requisite and proper. And there seems to be no room for a doubt that whatever
concerns the general interests of learning, of agriculture, of manufactures, and of
commerce, are within the sphere of the National Councils, as far as regards an
application of money.” The latter Report assumes the same latitude of power in the
national councils, and applies it to the encouragement of agriculture by means of a
society to be established at the seat of Government. Although neither of these Reports
may have received the sanction of a law carrying it into effect, yet, on the other hand,
the extraordinary doctrine contained in both has passed without the slightest positive
mark of disapprobation from the authority to which it was addressed.

Now, whether the phrases in question be construed to authorize every measure
relating to the common defence and general welfare, as contended by some—or every
measure only in which there might be an application of money, as suggested by the
caution of others—the effect must substantially be the same, in destroying the import
and force of the particular enumeration of powers which follow these general phrases
in the Constitution; for it is evident that there is not a single power whatever which
may not have some reference to the common defence or the general welfare; nor a
power of any magnitude, which, in its exercise, does not involve or admit an
application of money. The government, therefore, which possesses power in either
one or other of these extents, is a government without the limitations formed by a


particular enumeration of powers; and, consequently, the meaning and effect of this
particular enumeration is destroyed by the exposition given to these general phrases.

This conclusion will not be affected by an attempt to qualify the power over the
“general welfare,” by referring it to cases where the general welfare is beyond the
reach of separate provisions by the individual States, and leaving to these their
jurisdictions in cases to which their separate provisions may be competent; for, as the
authority of the individual States must in all cases be incompetent to general
regulations operating through the whole, the authority of the United States would be
extended to every object relating to the general welfare which might, by any
possibility, be provided for by the general authority. This qualifying construction,
therefore, would have little, if any, tendency to circumscribe the power claimed under
the latitude of the terms “general welfare.”

The true and fair construction of this expression, both in the original and existing
Federal compacts, appears to the committee too obvious to be mistaken. In both, the
Congress is authorized to provide money for the common defence and general
welfare. In both, is subjoined to this authority an enumeration of the cases to which
their powers shall extend. Money cannot be applied to the general welfare, otherwise
than by an application of it to some particular measure conducive to the general
welfare. Whenever, therefore, money has been raised by the general authority, and is
to be applied to a particular measure, a question arises whether the particular measure
be within the enumerated authorities vested in Congress. If it be, the money requisite
for it may be applied to it; if it be not, no such application can be made. This fair and
obvious interpretation coincides with and is enforced by the clause in the Constitution
which declares that “no money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence
of appropriations by law.” An appropriation of money to the general welfare would be
deemed rather a mockery than an observance of this constitutional injunction.

2. Whether the exposition of the general phrases here combatted would not by degrees
consolidate the States into one sovereignty, is a question concerning which the
committee can perceive little room for difference of opinion. To consolidate the States
into one sovereignty, nothing more can be wanted than to supersede their respective
sovereignties in the cases reserved to them, by extending the sovereignty of the
United States to all cases of the “general welfare”—that is to say, to all cases
whatever.

3. That the obvious tendency and inevitable result of a consolidation of the States into
one sovereignty, would be to transform the republican system of the United States
into a monarchy, is a point which seems to have been sufficiently decided by the
general sentiment of America. In almost every instance of discussion relating to the
consolidation in question, its certain tendency to pave the way to monarchy seems not
to have been contested. The prospect of such a consolidation has formed the only
topic of controversy. It would be unnecessary, therefore, for the committee to dwell
long on the reasons which support the position of the General Assembly. It may not
be improper, however, to remark two consequences evidently flowing from an
extension of the Federal powers to every subject falling within the idea of the “general
welfare.”


One consequence must be, to enlarge the sphere of discretion allotted to the Executive
Magistrate. Even within the legislative limits properly defined by the Constitution, the
difficulty of accommodating legal regulations to a country so great in extent and so
various in its circumstances has been much felt, and has lead to occasional
investments of power in the Executive, which involve perhaps as large a portion of
discretion as can be deemed consistent with the nature of the Executive trust. In
proportion as the objects of legislative care might be multiplied, would the time
allowed for each be diminished, and the difficulty of providing uniform and particular
regulations for all be increased. From these sources would necessarily ensue a greater
latitude to the agency of that department which is always in existence, and which
could best mould regulations of a general nature so as to suit them to the diversity of
particular situations. And it is in this latitude, as a supplement to the deficiency of the
laws, that the degree of Executive prerogative materially consists.

The other consequence would be, that of an excessive augmentation of the offices,
honors, and emoluments, depending on the Executive will. Add to the present
legitimate stock all those of every description which a consolidation of the States
would take from them and turn over to the Federal Government, and the patronage of
the Executive would necessarily be as much swelled in this case as its prerogative
would be in the other.

This disproportionate increase of prerogative and patronage must, evidently, either
enable the Chief Magistrate of the Union, by quiet means, to secure his re-election
from time to time, and finally to regulate the succession as he might please; or, by
giving so transcendent an importance to the office, would render the elections to it so
violent and corrupt, that the public voice itself might call for an hereditary in place of
an elective succession. Whichever of these events might follow, the transformation of
the republican system of the United States into a monarchy, anticipated by the
General Assembly from a consolidation of the States into one sovereignty, would be
equally accomplished; and whether it would be into a mixed or an absolute monarchy
might depend on too many contingencies to admit of any certain foresight.

The resolution next in order is contained in the following terms:

“That the General Assembly doth particularly protest against the palpable and
alarming infractions of the Constitution in the two late cases of the ‘Alien and
Sedition Acts,’ passed at the last session of Congress; the first of which exercises a
power nowhere delegated to the Federal Government, and which, by uniting
legislative and judicial powers to those of executive, subverts the general principles of
a free Government, as well as the particular organization and positive provisions of
the Federal Constitution; and the other of which acts exercises, in like manner, a
power not delegated by the Constitution, but, on the contrary, expressly and positively
forbidden by one of the amendments thereto; a power which, more than any other,
ought to produce universal alarm; because it is levelled against that right of freely
examining public characters and measures, and of free communication among the
people thereon, which has ever been justly deemed the only effectual guardian of
every other right.”


The subject of this resolution having, it is presumed, more particularly led the General
Assembly into the proceedings which they communicated to the other States, and
being in itself of peculiar importance, it deserves the most critical and faithful
investigation, for the length of which no other apology will be necessary.

The subject divides itself into—first, “The Alien Act”; secondly, “The Sedition Act.”

Of the “Alien Act,” it is affirmed by the resolution—1st. That it exercises a power
nowhere delegated to the Federal Government. 2d. That it unites legislative and
judicial powers to those of the Executive. 3d. That this union of power subverts the
general principles of free government. 4th. That it subverts the particular organization
and positive provisions of the Federal Constitution.

In order to clear the way for a correct view of the first position several observations
will be premised.

1. In the first place, it is to be borne in mind that it being a characteristic feature of the
Federal Constitution, as it was originally ratified, and an amendment thereto having
precisely declared, “That the powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States, respectively,
or to the people”; it is incumbent in this as in every other exercise of power by the
Federal Government, to prove from the Constitution that it grants the particular power
exercised.

The next observation to be made is, that much confusion and fallacy have been
thrown into the question by blending the two cases of aliens, members of a hostile
nation, and aliens, members of friendly nations. These two cases are so obviously and
so essentially distinct, that it occasions no little surprise that the distinction should
have been disregarded; and the surprise is so much the greater, as it appears that the
two cases are actually distinguished by two separate acts of Congress, passed at the
same session, and comprised in the same publication; the one providing for the case
of “alien enemies”, the other, “concerning aliens” indiscriminately, and, consequently,
extending to aliens of every nation in peace and amity with the United States. With
respect to alien enemies, no doubt has been intimated as to the Federal authority over
them; the Constitution having expressly delegated to Congress the power to declare
war against any nation, and, of course, to treat it and all its members as enemies. With
respect to aliens who are not enemies, but members of nations in peace and amity
with the United States, the power assumed by the act of Congress is denied to be
constitutional; and it is, accordingly, against this act that the protest of the General
Assembly is expressly and exclusively directed.

A third observation is, that were it admitted, as is contended, that the “act concerning
aliens” has for its object, not a penal, but a preventive justice, it would still remain to
be proved that it comes within the constitutional power of the Federal Legislature;
and, if within its power, that the Legislature has exercised it in a constitutional
manner.


In the administration of preventive justice the following principles have been held
sacred: that some probable ground of suspicion be exhibited before some judicial
authority; that it be supported by oath or affirmation, that the party may avoid being
thrown into confinement by finding pledges or sureties for his legal conduct,
sufficient in the judgment of some judicial authority; that he may have the benefit of a
writ of habeas corpus, and thus obtain his release if wrongfully confined; and that he
may at any time be discharged from his recognisance, or his confinement, and
restored to his former liberty and rights on the order of the proper judicial authority, if
it shall see sufficient cause.

All these principles of the only preventive justice known to American jurisprudence
are violated by the Alien Act. The ground of suspicion is to be judged of, not by any
judicial authority, but by the Executive Magistrate alone. No oath or affirmation is
required. If the suspicion be held reasonable by the President, he may order the
suspected alien to depart the territory of the United States, without the opportunity of
avoiding the sentence by finding pledges for his future good conduct. As the President
may limit the time of departure as he pleases, the benefit of the writ of habeas corpus
may be suspended with respect to the party, although the Constitution ordains that it
shall not be suspended unless when the public safety may require it, in case of
rebellion or invasion—neither of which existed at the passage of the act; and the party
being, under the sentence of the President, either removed from the United States, or
being punished by imprisonment, or disqualification ever to become a citizen, on
conviction of not obeying the order of removal, he cannot be discharged from the
proceedings against him, and restored to the benefits of his former situation, although
the highest judicial authority should see the most sufficient cause for it.

But, in the last place, it can never be admitted that the removal of aliens, authorized
by the act, is to be considered, not as punishment for an offence, but as a measure of
precaution and prevention. If the banishment of an alien from a country into which he
has been invited as the asylum most auspicious to his happiness—a country where he
may have formed the most tender connexions; where he may have invested his entire
property, and acquired property of the real and permanent, as well as the movable and
temporary kind; where he enjoys, under the laws, a greater share of the blessings of
personal security, and personal liberty, than he can elsewhere hope for, and where he
may have nearly completed his probationary title to citizenship; if, moreover, in the
execution of the sentence against him, he is to be exposed, not only to the ordinary
dangers of the sea, but to the peculiar casualties incident to a crisis of war and of
unusual licentiousness on that element, and possibly to vindictive purposes which his
emigration itself may have provoked; if a banishment of this sort be not a punishment,
and among the severest of punishments, it will be difficult to imagine a doom to
which the name can be applied. And if it be a punishment, it will remain to be
inquired whether it can be constitutionally inflicted, on mere suspicion, by the single
will of the Executive Magistrate, on persons convicted of no personal offence against
the laws of the land, nor involved in any offence against the law of nations, charged
on the foreign State of which they are members.


One argument offered in justification of this power exercised over aliens is, that the
admission of them into the country being of favor, not of right, the favor is at all times
revocable.

To this argument it might be answered, that, allowing the truth of the inference, it
would be no proof of what is required. A question would still occur, whether the
Constitution had vested the discretionary power of admitting aliens in the Federal
Government or in the State governments.

But it cannot be a true inference, that, because the admission of an alien is a favor, the
favor may be revoked at pleasure. A grant of land to an individual may be of favor,
not of right; but the moment the grant is made, the favor becomes a right, and must be
forfeited before it can be taken away. To pardon a malefactor may be a favor, but the
pardon is not, on that account, the less irrevocable. To admit an alien to naturalization,
is as much a favor as to admit him to reside in the country; yet it cannot be pretended
that a person naturalized can be deprived of the benefits any more than a native
citizen can be disfranchised.

Again, it is said, that aliens not being parties to the Constitution, the rights and
privileges which it secures cannot be at all claimed by them.

To this reasoning, also, it might be answered that, although aliens are not parties to
the Constitution, it does not follow that the Constitution has vested in Congress an
absolute power over them. The parties to the Constitution may have granted, or
retained, or modified, the power over aliens, without regard to that particular
consideration.

But a more direct reply is, that it does not follow, because aliens are not parties to the
Constitution, as citizens are parties to it, that, whilst they actually conform to it, they
have no right to its protection. Aliens are not more parties to the laws than they are
parties to the Constitution; yet it will not be disputed that, as they owe, on one hand, a
temporary obedience, they are entitled, in return, to their protection and advantage.

If aliens had no rights under the Constitution, they might not only be banished, but
even capitally punished, without a jury or the other incidents to a fair trial. But so far
has a contrary principle been carried, in every part of the United States, that, except
on charges of treason, an alien has, besides all the common privileges, the special one
of being tried by a jury, of which one-half may be also aliens.

It is said further, that, by the law and practice of nations, aliens may be removed, at
discretion, for offences against the law of nations; that Congress are authorized to
define and punish such offences; and that to be dangerous to the peace of society is, in
aliens, one of those offences.

The distinction between alien enemies and alien friends is a clear and conclusive
answer to this argument. Alien enemies are under the law of nations, and liable to be
punished for offences against it. Alien friends, except in the single case of public


ministers, are under the municipal law, and must be tried and punished according to
that law only.

This argument also, by referring the alien act to the power of Congress to define and
punish offences against the law of nations, yields the point that the act is of a penal,
not merely of a preventive operation. It must, in truth, be so considered. And if it be a
penal act, the punishment it inflicts must be justified by some offence that deserves it.

Offences for which aliens, within the jurisdiction of a country are punishable,
are—first, offences committed by the nation of which they make a part, and in whose
offences they are involved; secondly, offences committed by themselves alone,
without any charge against the nation to which they belong. The first is the case of
alien enemies; the second, the case of alien friends. In the first case, the offending
nation can no otherwise be punished than by war, one of the laws of which authorizes
the expulsion of such of its members as may be found within the country against
which the offence has been committed. In the second case—the offence being
committed by the individual, not by his nation, and against the municipal law, not
against the law of nations—the individual only, and not the nation, is punishable; and
the punishment must be conducted according to the municipal law, not according to
the law of nations. Under this view of the subject, the act of Congress for the removal
of alien enemies, being conformable to the law of nations, is justified by the
Constitution and the “act” for the removal of alien friends, being repugnant to the
constitutional principles of municipal law, is unjustifiable

Nor is the act of Congress for the removal of alien friends more agreeable to the
general practice of nations than it is within the purview of the law of nations. The
general practice of nations distinguishes between alien friends and alien enemies. The
latter it has proceeded against, according to the law of nations, by expelling them as
enemies. The former it has considered as under a local and temporary allegiance, and
entitled to a correspondent protection. If contrary instances are to be found in
barbarous countries, under undefined prerogatives, or amid revolutionary dangers,
they will not be deemed fit precedents for the Government of the United States, even
if not beyond its constitutional authority.

It is said that Congress may grant letters of marque and reprisal; that reprisals may be
made on persons as well as property; and that the removal of aliens may be
considered as the exercise, in an inferior degree, of the general power of reprisal on
persons.

Without entering minutely into a question that does not seem to require it, it may be
remarked that reprisal is a seizure of foreign persons or property, with a view to
obtain that justice for injuries done by one State, or its members, to another State, or
its members, for which a refusal of the aggressors requires such a resort to force under
the law of nations. It must be considered as an abuse of words to call the removal of
persons from a country a seizure or reprisal on them; nor is the distinction to be
overlooked between reprisals on persons within the country and under the faith of its
laws, and on persons out of the country. But laying aside these considerations, it is
evidently impossible to bring the alien act within the power of granting reprisals,


since it does not allege or imply any injury received from any particular nation for
which this proceeding against its members was intended as a reparation. The
proceeding is authorized against aliens of every nation; of nations charged neither
with any similar proceedings against American citizens, nor with any injuries for
which justice might be sought in the mode prescribed by the act. Were it true,
therefore, that good causes existed for reprisals against one or more foreign nations,
and that neither the persons nor property of its members under the faith of our laws
could plead an exemption, the operation of the act ought to have been limited to the
aliens among us belonging to such nations. To license reprisals against all nations for
aggressions charged on one only, would be a measure as contrary to every principle of
justice and public law as to a wise policy, and the universal practice of nations.

It is said that the right of removing aliens is an incident to the power of war vested in
Congress by the Constitution.

This is a former argument in a new shape only, and is answered by repeating, that the
removal of alien enemies is an incident to the power of war; that the removal of alien
friends is not an incident to the power of war.

It is said that Congress are, by the Constitution, to protect each State against invasion;
and that the means of preventing invasion are included in the power of protection
against it.

The power of war, in general, having been before granted by the Constitution, this
clause must either be a mere specification for greater caution and certainty, of which
there are other examples in the instrument, or be the injunction of a duty superadded
to a grant of the power. Under either explanation it cannot enlarge the powers of
Congress on the subject. The power and the duty to protect each State against an
invading enemy would be the same under the general power, if this regard to greater
caution had been omitted.

Invasion is an operation of war. To protect against invasion is an exercise of the
power of war. A power, therefore, not incident to war cannot be incident to a
particular modification of war. And as the removal of alien friends has appeared to be
no incident to a general state of war, it cannot be incident to a partial state or a
particular modification of war.

Nor can it ever be granted that a power to act on a case when it actually occurs,
includes a power over all the means that may tend to prevent the occurrence of the
case. Such a latitude of construction would render unavailing every practical
definition of particular and limited powers. Under the idea of preventing war in
general, as well as invasion in particular, not only an indiscriminate removal of all
aliens might be enforced, but a thousand other things still more remote from the
operations and precautions appurtenant to war might take place. A bigoted or
tyrannical nation might threaten us with war, unless certain religious or political
regulations were adopted by us; yet it never could be inferred, if the regulations which
would prevent war were such as Congress had otherwise no power to make, that the
power to make them would grow out of the purpose they were to answer. Congress


have power to suppress insurrections, yet it would not be allowed to follow that they
might employ all the means tending to prevent them, of which a system of moral
instruction for the ignorant, and of provident support for the poor, might be regarded
as among the most efficacious.

One argument for the power of the General Government to remove aliens would have
been passed in silence, if it had appeared under any authority inferior to that of a
report made during the last session of Congress to the House of Representatives by a
committee, and approved by the House. The doctrine on which this argument is
founded is of so new and so extraordinary a character, and strikes so radically at the
political system of America, that it is proper to state it in the very words of the report:

“The act [concerning aliens] is said to be unconstitutional, because to remove aliens is
a direct breach of the Constitution, which provides, by the 9th section of the 1st
article, that the migration or importation of such persons as any of the States shall
think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year 1808.”

Among the answers given to this objection to the constitutionality of the act, the
following very remarkable one is extracted:

“Thirdly, that as the Constitution has given to the States no power to remove aliens
during the period of the limitation under consideration, in the mean time, on the
construction assumed, there would be no authority in the country empowered to send
away dangerous aliens, which cannot be admitted.”

The reasoning here used would not in any view be conclusive, because there are
powers exercised by most other Governments, which, in the United States, are
withheld by the people, both from the General Government and from the State
governments. Of this sort are many of the powers prohibited by the Declarations of
Right prefixed to the constitutions, or by the clauses in the constitutions in the nature
of such declarations. Nay, so far is the political system of the United States
distinguishable from that of other countries, by the caution with which powers are
delegated and defined, that in one very important case, even of commercial regulation
and revenue, the power is absolutely locked up against the hands of both
Governments. A tax on exports can be laid by no constitutional authority whatever.
Under a system thus peculiarly guarded there could surely be no absurdity in
supposing that alien friends, who, if guilty of treasonable machinations, may be
punished, or if suspected on probable grounds, may be secured by pledges or
imprisonment, in like manner with permanent citizens, were never meant to be
subjected to banishment by any arbitrary and unusual process, either under the one
Government or the other.

But it is not the inconclusiveness of the general reasoning in this passage which
chiefly calls the attention to it. It is the principle assumed by it, that the powers held
by the States are given to them by the Constitution of the United States; and the
inference from this principle, that the powers supposed to be necessary which are not
so given to the State governments, must reside in the Government of the United
States.


The respect which is felt for every portion of the constituted authorities forbids some
of the reflections which this singular paragraph might excite; and they are the more
readily suppressed, as it may be presumed, with justice perhaps as well as candor, that
inadvertence may have had its share in the error. It would be an unjustifiable delicacy,
nevertheless, to pass by so portentous a claim, proceeding from so high an authority,
without a monitory notice of the fatal tendencies with which it would be pregnant.

Lastly, it is said that a law on the same subject with the Alien Act, passed by this State
originally in 1785, and re-enacted in 1792, is a proof that a summary removal of
suspected aliens was not theretofore regarded by the Virginia Legislature as liable to
the objections now urged against such a measure.

This charge against Virginia vanishes before the simple remark, that the law of
Virginia relates to “suspicious persons, being the subjects of any foreign power or
State who shall have made a declaration of war, or actually commenced hostilities, or
from whom the President shall apprehend hostile designs,” whereas the act of
Congress relates to aliens, being the subjects of foreign powers and States who have
neither declared war nor commenced hostilities, nor from whom hostile designs are
apprehended.

2. It is next affirmed by the Alien Act, that it unites legislative, judicial, and executive
powers, in the hands of the President.

However difficult it may be to mark in every case with clearness and certainty the line
which divides legislative power from the other departments of power, all will agree
that the powers referred to these departments may be so general and undefined as to
be of a legislative, not of an executive or judicial nature, and may for that reason be
unconstitutional. Details, to a certain degree, are essential to the nature and character
of law; and on criminal subjects, it is proper that details should leave as little as
possible to the discretion of those who are to apply and execute the law. If nothing
more were required, in exercising a legislative trust, than a general conveyance of
authority—without laying down any precise rules by which the authority conveyed
should be carried into effect—it would follow that the whole power of legislation
might be transferred by the Legislature from itself, and proclamations might become
substitutes for laws. A delegation of power in this latitude would not be denied to be a
union of the different powers.

To determine, then, whether the appropriate powers of the distinct departments are
united by the act authorizing the Executive to remove aliens, it must be inquired
whether it contains such details, definitions, and rules, as appertain to the true
character of a law; especially a law by which personal liberty is invaded, property
deprived of its value to the owner, and life itself indirectly exposed to danger.

The Alien Act declares “that it shall be lawful for the President to order all such aliens
as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States, or shall have
reasonable ground to suspect are concerned in any treasonable or secret machinations
against the Government thereof, to depart,” &c.


Could a power be given in terms less definite, less particular, and less precise? To be
dangerous to the public safety—to be suspected of secret machinations against the
Government; these can never be mistaken for legal rules or certain definitions. They
leave everything to the President. His will is the law.

But it is not a legislative power only that is given to the President. He is to stand in the
place of the judiciary also. His suspicion is the only evidence which is to convict; his
order, the only judgment which is to be executed.

Thus it is the President whose will is to designate the offensive conduct; it is his will
that is to ascertain the individuals on whom it is charged; and it is his will that is to
cause the sentence to be executed. It is rightly affirmed, therefore, that the act unites
legislative and judicial powers to those of the executive.

3. It is affirmed that this union of power subverts the general principles of free
government.

It has become an axiom in the science of government, that a separation of the
legislative, executive, and judicial departments is necessary to the preservation of
public liberty. Nowhere has this axiom been better understood in theory, or more
carefully pursued in practice, than in the United States.

4. It is affirmed that such a union of power subverts the particular organization and
positive provisions of the Federal Constitution.

According to the particular organization of the Constitution, its legislative powers are
vested in the Congress, its executive powers in the President, and its judicial powers
in a supreme and inferior tribunals. The union of any two of these powers, and still
more of all three, in any one of these departments, as has been shown to be done by
the Alien Act, must, consequently, subvert the constitutional organization of them.

That positive provisions in the Constitution, securing to individuals the benefits of fair
trial, are also violated by the union of powers in the Alien Act, necessarily results
from the two facts that the Act relates to alien friends, and that alien friends, being
under the municipal law only, are entitled to its protection.

The second object against which the resolution protests is the Sedition Act.

Of this Act it is affirmed: 1. That it exercises in like manner a power not delegated by
the Constitution. 2. That the power, on the contrary, is expressly and positively
forbidden by one of the amendments to the Constitution. 3. That this is a power which
more than any other ought to produce universal alarm, because it is levelled against
that right of freely examining public characters and measures, and of free
communication thereon, which has ever been justly deemed the only effectual
guardian of every other right.

1. That it exercises a power not delegated by the Constitution.


Here, again, it will be proper to recollect that the Federal Government being
composed of powers specifically granted, with a reservation of all others to the States
or to the people, the positive authority under which the Sedition Act could be passed
must be produced by those who assert its constitutionality. In what part of the
Constitution, then, is this authority to be found?

Several attempts have been made to answer this question, which will be examined in
their order. The committee will begin with one which has filled them with equal
astonishment and apprehension, and which, they cannot but persuade themselves,
must have the same effect on all who will consider it with coolness and impartiality,
and with a reverence for our Constitution in the true character in which it issued from
the sovereign authority of the people. The committee refer to the doctrine lately
advanced, as a sanction to the Sedition Act, “that the common or unwritten law,” a
law of vast extent and complexity, and embracing almost every possible subject of
legislation, both civil and criminal, makes a part of the law of these States, in their
united and national capacity.

The novelty, and, in the judgment of the committee, the extravagance of this
pretension, would have consigned it to the silence in which they have passed by other
arguments which an extraordinary zeal for the Act has drawn into the discussion; but
the auspices under which this innovation presents itself have constrained the
committee to bestow on it an attention which other considerations might have
forbidden.

In executing the task, it may be of use to look back to the colonial state of this
country, prior to the Revolution; to trace the effect of the Revolution which converted
the Colonies into independent States; to inquire into the import of the Articles of
Confederation, the first instrument by which the Union of the States was regularly
established; and, finally, to consult the Constitution of 1787, which is the oracle that
must decide the important question.

In the state prior to the Revolution, it is certain that the common law, under different
limitations, made a part of the colonial codes. But whether it be understood that the
original colonists brought the law with them, or made it their law by adoption, it is
equally certain that it was the separate law of each colony within its respective limits,
and was unknown to them as a law pervading and operating through the whole as one
society.

It could not possibly be otherwise. The common law was not the same in any two of
the Colonies, in some the modifications were materially and extensively different.
There was no common legislature by which a common will could be expressed in the
form of a law; nor any common magistracy by which such a law could be carried into
practice. The will of each colony, alone and separately, had its organs for these
purposes.

This stage of our political history furnishes no foothold for the patrons of this new
doctrine.


Did, then, the principle or operation of the great event which made the Colonies
independent States imply or introduce the common law as a law of the Union?

The fundamental principle of the Revolution was, that the Colonies were co-ordinate
members with each other and with Great Britain, of an empire united by a common
executive sovereign, but not united by any common legislative sovereign. The
legislative power was maintained to be as complete in each American Parliament, as
in the British Parliament. And the royal prerogative was in force in each Colony by
virtue of its acknowledging the King for its executive magistrate, as it was in Great
Britain by virtue of a like acknowledgment there. A denial of these principles by
Great Britain, and the assertion of them by America, produced the Revolution.

There was a time, indeed, when an exception to the legislative separation of the
several component and co-equal parts of the empire obtained a degree of
acquiescence. The British Parliament was allowed to regulate the trade with foreign
nations, and between the different parts of the empire. This was, however, mere
practice without right, and contrary to the true theory of the Constitution. The
convenience of some regulations, in both cases, was apparent; and as there was no
legislature with power over the whole, nor any constitutional pre-eminence among the
legislatures of the several parts, it was natural for the legislature of that particular part
which was the eldest and the largest to assume this function, and for the others to
acquiesce in it. This tacit arrangement was the less criticised, as the regulations
established by the British Parliament operated in favor of that part of the empire
which seemed to bear the principle share of the public burdens, and were regarded as
an indemnification of its advances for the other parts. As long as this regulating power
was confined to the two objects of conveniency and equity, it was not complained of
nor much inquired into. But, no sooner was it perverted to the selfish views of the
party assuming it, than the injured parties began to feel and to reflect; and the moment
the claim to a direct and indefinite power was ingrafted on the precedent of the
regulating power, the whole charm was dissolved, and every eye opened to the
usurpation. The assertion by Great Britain of a power to make laws for the other
members of the empire in all cases whatsoever, ended in the discovery that she had a
right to make laws for them in no cases whatsoever.

Such being the ground of our Revolution, no support nor colour can be drawn from it
for the doctrine that the common law is binding on these States as one society. The
doctrine, on the contrary, is evidently repugnant to the fundamental principle of the
Revolution.

The Articles of Confederation are the next source of information on this subject.

In the interval between the commencement of the Revolution and the final ratification
of these Articles, the nature and extent of the Union was determined by the
circumstances of the crisis, rather than by any accurate delineation of the general
authority. It will not be alleged that the “common law” could have had any legitimate
birth as a law of the United States during that state of things. If it came as such into
existence at all the Charter of Confederation must have been its parent.


Here again, however, its pretensions are absolutely destitute of foundation. This
instrument does not contain a sentence or a syllable that can be tortured into a
countenance of the idea that the parties to it were, with respect to the objects of the
common law, to form one community. No such law is named, or implied, or alluded
to, as being in force, or as brought into force by that compact. No provision is made
by which such a law could be carried into operation; whilst, on the other hand, every
such inference or pretext is absolutely precluded by Article II, which declares “that
each State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power,
jurisdiction, and right which is not by this Confederation expressly delegated to the
United States in Congress assembled.”

Thus far it appears that not a vestige of this extraordinary doctrine can be found in the
origin or progress of American institutions. The evidence against it has, on the
contrary, grown stronger at every step, till it has amounted to a formal and positive
exclusion, by written articles of compact among the parties concerned.

Is this exclusion revoked, and the common law introduced as national law by the
present Constitution of the United States? This is the final question to be examined.

It is readily admitted that particular parts of the common law may have a sanction
from the Constitution, so far as they are necessarily comprehended in the technical
phrases which the powers delegated to the Government; and so far also as such other
parts may be adopted by Congress as necessary and proper for carrying into execution
the powers expressly delegated. But the question does not relate to either of these
portions of the common law. It relates to the common law beyond these limitations.

The only part of the Constitution which seems to have been relied on in this case is
the 2d section of Article III: “The judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and
equity arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made
or which shall be made under their authority.”

It has been asked, what cases, distinct from those arising under the laws and treaties
of the United States, can arise under the Constitution, other than those arising under
the common law? and it is inferred that the common law is accordingly adopted or
recognized by the Constitution.

Never, perhaps, was so broad a construction applied to a text so clearly unsusceptible
of it. If any colour for the inference could be found, it must be in the impossibility of
finding any other cases in law and equity, within the provisions of the Constitution, to
satisfy the expression; and rather than resort to a construction affecting so essentially
the whole character of the Government, it would perhaps be more rational to consider
the expression as a mere pleonasm or inadvertence. But it is not necessary to decide
on such a dilemma. The expression is fully satisfied and its accuracy justified by two
descriptions of cases to which the judicial authority is extended, and neither of which
implies that the common law is the law of the United States. One of these descriptions
comprehends the case growing out of the restrictions on the legislative power of the
States. For example, it is provided that “no State shall emit bills of credit,” or “make
any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts.” Should this


prohibition be violated, and a suit between citizens of the same State be the
consequence, this would be a case arising under the Constitution before the judicial
power of the United States. A second description comprehends suits between citizens
and foreigners, of citizens of different States, to be decided according to the State or
foreign laws, but submitted by the Constitution to the judicial power of the United
States, the judicial power being in several instances extended beyond the legislative
power of the United States.

To this explanation of the text the following observations may be added:

The expression “cases in law and equity” is manifestly confined to cases of a civil
nature, and would exclude cases of criminal jurisdiction. Criminal cases in law and
equity would be a language unknown to the law.

The succeeding paragraph of the same section is in harmony with this construction. It
is in these words: “In all cases affecting ambassadors, or other public ministers, and
consuls, and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court shall have
original jurisdiction. In all the other cases (including cases of law and equity arising
under the Constitution) the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction both as to
law and fact; with such exceptions and under such regulations as Congress shall
make.”

This paragraph, by expressly giving an appellate jurisdiction in cases of law and
equity arising under the Constitution, to fact as well as to law, clearly excludes
criminal cases where the trial by jury is secured, because the fact in such cases is not a
subject of appeal. And, although the appeal is liable to such exceptions and
regulations as Congress may adopt, yet it is not to be supposed that an exception of all
criminal cases could be contemplated, as well because a discretion in Congress to
make or omit the exception would be improper, as because it would have been
unnecessary. The exception could as easily have been made by the Constitution itself,
as referred to the Congress.

Once more: the amendment last added to the Constitution deserves attention as
throwing light on this subject. “The judicial power of the United States shall not be
construed to extend to any suit in law or equity commenced or prosecuted against one
of the United States by citizens of another State, or by citizens or subjects of any
foreign power.” As it will not be pretended that any criminal proceeding could take
place against a State, the terms law or equity must be understood as appropriate to
civil in exclusion of criminal cases.

From these considerations it is evident that this part of the Constitution, even if it
could be applied at all to the purpose for which it has been cited, would not include
any cases whatever of a criminal nature, and consequently would not authorize the
inference from it that the judicial authority extends to offences against the common
law as offences arising under the Constitution.

It is further to be considered that, even if this part of the Constitution could be
strained into an application to every common-law case, criminal as well as civil, it


could have no effect in justifying the Sedition Act; which is an exercise of legislative
and not of judicial power: and it is the judicial power only of which the extent is
defined in this part of the Constitution.

There are two passages in the Constitution in which a description of the law of the
United States is found. The first is contained in Article III, Section 2, in the words
following: “This Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made or
which shall be made under their authority.” The second is contained in the second
paragraph of Article VI, as follows: “This Constitution and the laws of the United
States which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall
be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the
land.” The first of these descriptions was meant as a guide to the judges of the United
States; the second, as a guide to the judges of the several States. Both of them consist
of an enumeration which was evidently meant to be precise and complete. If the
common law had been understood to be a law of the United States, it is not possible to
assign a satisfactory reason why it was not expressed in the enumeration.

In aid of these objections the difficulties and confusion inseparable from a
constructive introduction of the common law would afford powerful reasons against
it.

Is it to be the common law with or without the British statutes?

If without the statutory amendments, the vices of the code would be insupportable.

If with these amendments, what period is to be fixed for limiting the British authority
over our laws?

Is it to be the date of the eldest or the youngest of the Colonies?

Or are the dates to be thrown together and a medium deduced?

Or is our independence to be taken for the date?

Is, again, regard to be had to the various changes in the common law made by the
local codes of America?

Is regard to be had to such changes, subsequent as well as prior to the establishment
of the Constitution?

Is regard to be had to future as well as to past changes?

Is the law to be different in every State as differently modified by its code, or are the
modifications of any particular State to be applied to all?

And, on the latter supposition, which, among the State codes would form the
standard?


Questions of this sort might be multiplied with as much ease as there would be
difficulty in answering them.

The consequences flowing from the proposed construction furnish other objections
equally conclusive, unless the text were peremptory in its meaning and consistent
with other parts of the instrument.

These consequences may be in relation to the legislative authority of the United
States, to the executive authority; to the judicial authority; and to the governments of
the several States.

If it be understood that the common law is established by the Constitution, it follows
that no part of the law can be altered by the Legislature; such of the statutes already
passed as may be repugnant thereto would be nullified, particularly the Sedition Act
itself, which boasts of being a melioration of the common law; and the whole code,
with all its incongruities, barbarisms, and bloody maxims, would be inviolably
saddled on the good people of the United States.

Should this consequence be rejected and the common law be held, like other laws,
liable to revision and alteration by the authority of Congress, it then follows that the
authority of Congress is co-extensive with the objects of common law—that is to say,
with every object of legislation; for to every such object does some branch or other of
the common law extend. The authority of Congress would therefore be no longer
under the limitations marked out in the Constitution. They would be authorized to
legislate in all cases whatsoever.

In the next place, as the President possesses the executive powers of the Constitution,
and is to see that the laws be faithfully executed, his authority also must be co-
extensive with every branch of the common law. The additions which this would
make to his power, though not readily to be estimated, claim the most serious
attention.

This is not all, it will merit the most profound consideration, how far an indefinite
admission of the common law, with a latitude in construing it, equal to the
construction by which it is deduced from the Constitution, might draw after it the
various prerogatives making part of the unwritten law of England. The English
Constitution itself is nothing more than a composition of unwritten laws and maxims.

In the third place, whether the common law be admitted as of legal or of constitutional
obligation, it would confer on the judicial department a discretion little short of a
legislative power.

On the supposition of its having a constitutional obligation, this power in the judges
would be permanent and irremediable by the Legislature. On the other supposition the
power would not expire until the Legislature should have introduced a full system of
statutory provisions. Let it be observed, too, that besides all the uncertainties above
enumerated, and which present an immense field for judicial discretion, it would


remain with the same department to decide what parts of the common law would, and
what would not, be properly applicable to the circumstances of the United States.

A discretion of this sort has always been lamented as incongruous and dangerous,
even in the Colonial and State courts, although so much narrowed by positive
provisions in the local codes on all the principal subjects embraced by the common
law. Under the United States, where so few laws exist on those subjects, and where so
great a lapse of time must happen before the vast chasm could be supplied, it is
manifest that the power of the judges over the law would, in fact, erect them into
legislators, and that for a long time it would be impossible for the citizens to
conjecture, either what was or would be law.

In the last place, the consequence of admitting the common law as the law of the
United States, on the authority of the individual States, is as obvious as it would be
fatal. As this law relates to every subject of legislation, and would be paramount to
the Constitutions and laws of the States, the admission of it would overwhelm the
residuary sovereignty of the States, and by one constructive operation new model the
whole political fabric of the country.

From the review thus taken of the situation of the American colonies prior to their
independence; of the effect of this event on their situation; of the nature and import of
the Articles of Confederation; of the true meaning of the passage in the existing
Constitution from which the common law has been deduced; of the difficulties and
uncertainties incident to the doctrine; and of its vast consequences in extending the
powers of the Federal Government, and in superseding the authorities of the State
governments—the committee feel the utmost confidence in concluding that the
common law never was, nor by any fair construction ever can be, deemed a law for
the American people as one community; and they indulge the strongest expectation
that the same conclusion will finally be drawn by all candid and accurate inquirers
into the subject. It is, indeed, distressing to reflect that it ever should have been made
a question, whether the Constitution, on the whole face of which is seen so much
labor to enumerate and define the several objects of Federal power, could intend to
introduce in the lump, in an indirect manner, and by a forced construction of a few
phrases, the vast and multifarious jurisdiction involved in the common law—a law
filling so many ample volumes; a law overspreading the entire field of legislation; and
a law that would sap the foundation of the Constitution as a system of limited and
specified powers. A severer reproach could not, in the opinion of the committee, be
thrown on the Constitution, on those who framed or on those who established it, than
such a supposition would throw on them.

The argument, then, drawn from the common law, on the ground of its being adopted
or recognised by the Constitution, being inapplicable to the Sedition Act, the
committee will proceed to examine the other arguments which have been founded on
the Constitution.

They will waste but little time on the attempt to cover the act by the preamble to the
Constitution, it being contrary to every acknowledged rule of construction to set up
this part of an instrument in opposition to the plain meaning expressed in the body of


the instrument. A preamble usually contains the general motives or reasons for the
particular regulations or measures which follow it, and is always understood to be
explained and limited by them. In the present instance, a contrary interpretation would
have the inadmissible effect of rendering nugatory or improper every part of the
Constitution which succeeds the preamble.

The paragraph in Article I, Section 8, which contains the power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common
defence and general welfare, having been already examined, will also require no
particular attention in this place. It will have been seen that, in its fair and consistent
meaning, it cannot enlarge the enumerated powers vested in Congress.

The part of the Constitution which seems most to be recurred to, in the defence of the
Sedition Act, is the last clause of the above section, empowering Congress “to make
all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the
United States, or in any department or officer thereof.”

The plain import of this clause is, that Congress shall have all the incidental or
instrumental powers necessary and proper for carrying into execution all the express
powers, whether they be vested in the Government of the United States, more
collectively, or in the several departments or officers thereof.

It is not a grant of new powers to Congress, but merely a declaration, for the removal
of all uncertainty, that the means of carrying into execution those otherwise granted
are included in the grant.

Whenever, therefore, a question arises concerning the constitutionality of a particular
power, the first question is, whether the power be expressed in the Constitution. If it
be, the question is decided. If it be not expressed, the next inquiry must be, whether it
is properly an incident to an express power, and necessary to its execution. If it be, it
may be exercised by Congress. If it be not, Congress cannot exercise it.

Let the question be asked, then, whether the power over the press exercised in the
Sedition Act be found among the powers expressly vested in the Congress. This is not
pretended.

Is there any express power, for executing which it is a necessary and proper power?

The power which has been selected, as least remote, in answer to this question, is that
“of suppressing insurrections”; which is said to imply a power to prevent
insurrections, by punishing whatever may lead or tend to them. But it surely cannot,
with the least plausibility, be said, that the regulation of the press, and a punishment
of libels, are exercises of a power to suppress insurrections. The most that could be
said would be that the punishment of libels, if it had the tendency ascribed to it, might
prevent the occasion of passing or executing laws necessary and proper for the
suppression of insurrections.


Has the Federal Government no power, then, to prevent as well as to punish resistance
to the laws?

They have the power, which the Constitution deemed most proper, in their hands for
the purpose. The Congress has power, before it happens, to pass laws for punishing it;
and the executive and judiciary have power to enforce those laws when it does
happen.

It must be recollected by many, and could be shown to the satisfaction of all, that the
construction here put on the terms “necessary and proper” is precisely the
construction which prevailed during the discussions and ratifications of the
Constitution. It may be added, and cannot too often be repeated, that it is a
construction absolutely necessary to maintain their consistency with the peculiar
character of the Government, as possessed of particular and definite powers only, not
of the general and indefinite powers vested in ordinary Governments; for if the power
to suppress insurrections includes a power to punish libels, or if the power to punish
includes a power to prevent, by all the means that may have that tendency, such is the
relation and influence among the most remote subjects of legislation, that a power
over a very few would carry with it a power over all. And it must be wholly
immaterial whether unlimited powers be exercised under the name of unlimited
powers, or be exercised under the name of unlimited means of carrying into execution
limited powers.

This branch of the subject will be closed with a reflection which must have weight
with all, but more especially with those who place peculiar reliance on the judicial
exposition of the Constitution as the bulwark provided against undue extensions of the
legislative power. If it be understood that the powers implied in the specified powers
have an immediate and appropriate relation to them, as means necessary and proper
for carrying them into execution, questions on the constitutionality of laws passed for
this purpose will be of a nature sufficiently precise and determinate for judicial
cognizance and control. If, on the other hand, Congress are not limited in the choice
of means by any such appropriate relation of them to the specified powers; but may
employ all such means as they may deem fitted to prevent as well as to punish crimes
subjected to their authority; such as may have a tendency only to promote an object
for which they are authorized to provide; every one must perceive that questions
relating to means of this sort must be questions for mere policy and expediency, on
which legislative discretion alone can decide, and from which the judicial
interposition and control are completely excluded.

2. The next point which the resolution requires to be proved is, that the power over the
press exercised by the Sedition Act is positively forbidden by one of the amendments
to the Constitution.

The amendment stands in these words: “Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the
freedom of speech or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble
and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.”


In the attempts to vindicate the Sedition Act it has been contended—1. That the
“freedom of the press” is to be determined by the meaning of these terms in the
common law. 2. That the article supposes the power over the press to be in Congress,
and prohibits them only from abridging the freedom allowed to it by the common
law.

Although it will be shown, on examining the second of these positions, that the
amendment is a denial to Congress of all power over the press, it may not be useless
to make the following observations on the first of them:

It is deemed to be a sound opinion that the Sedition Act, in its definition of some of
the crimes created, is an abridgment of the freedom of publication, recognised by
principles of the common law in England.

The freedom of the press under the common law is, in the defences of the Sedition
Act, made to consist in an exemption from all previous restraint on printed
publications by persons authorized to inspect and prohibit them. It appears to the
committee that this idea of the freedom of the press can never be admitted to be the
American idea of it; since a law inflicting penalties on printed publications would
have a similar effect with a law authorizing a previous restraint on them. It would
seem a mockery to say that no laws should be passed preventing publications from
being made, but that laws might be passed for punishing them in case they should be
made.

The essential difference between the British Government and the American
Constitutions will place this subject in the clearest light.

In the British Government the danger of encroachments on the rights of the people is
understood to be confined to the executive magistrate. The representatives of the
people in the Legislature are not only exempt themselves from distrust, but are
considered as sufficient guardians of the rights of their constituents against the danger
from the Executive. Hence it is a principle, that the Parliament is unlimited in its
power; or, in their own language, is omnipotent. Hence, too, all the ramparts for
protecting the rights of the people—such as their Magna Charta, their Bill of Rights,
&c.—are not reared against the Parliament, but against the royal prerogative. They are
merely legislative precautions against executive usurpations. Under such a
government as this, an exemption of the press from previous restraint, by licensers
appointed by the King, is all the freedom that can be secured to it.

In the United States the case is altogether different. The People, not the Government,
possess the absolute sovereignty. The Legislature, no less than the Executive, is under
limitations of power. Encroachments are regarded as possible from the one as well as
from the other. Hence, in the United States the great and essential rights of the people
are secured against legislative as well as against executive ambition. They are
secured, not by laws paramount to prerogative, but by constitutions paramount to
laws. This security of the freedom of the press requires that it should be exempt not
only from previous restraint by the Executive, as in Great Britain, but from legislative


restraint also; and this exemption, to be effectual, must be an exemption not only from
the previous inspection of licensers, but from the subsequent penalty of laws.

The state of the press, therefore, under the common law, cannot, in this point of view,
be the standard of its freedom in the United States.

But there is another view under which it may be necessary to consider this subject. It
may be alleged that although the security for the freedom of the press be different in
Great Britain and in this country, being a legal security only in the former, and a
constitutional security in the latter; and although there may be a further difference, in
an extension of the freedom of the press, here, beyond an exemption from previous
restraint, to an exemption from subsequent penalties also; yet that the actual legal
freedom of the press, under the common law, must determine the degree of freedom
which is meant by the terms, and which is constitutionally secured against both
previous and subsequent restraints.

The committee are not unaware of the difficulty of all general questions which may
turn on the proper boundary between the liberty and licentiousness of the press. They
will leave it, therefore, for consideration only how far the difference between the
nature of the British Government and the nature of the American Governments, and
the practice under the latter may show the degree of rigor in the former to be
inapplicable to and not obligatory in the latter.

The nature of governments elective, limited, and responsible in all their branches,
may well be supposed to require a greater freedom of animadversion than might be
tolerated by the genius of such a government as that of Great Britain. In the latter it is
a maxim that the King, an hereditary, not a responsible magistrate, can do no wrong,
and that the Legislature, which in two-thirds of its composition is also hereditary, not
responsible, can do what it pleases. In the United States the executive magistrates are
not held to be infallible, nor the Legislatures to be omnipotent; and both being
elective, are both responsible. Is it not natural and necessary, under such different
circumstances, that a different degree of freedom in the use of the press should be
contemplated?

Is not such an inference favoured by what is observable in Great Britain itself?
Notwithstanding the general doctrine of the common law on the subject of the press,
and the occasional punishment of those who use it with a freedom offensive to the
Government, it is well known that with respect to the responsible members of the
Government, where the reasons operating here become applicable there, the freedom
exercised by the press and protected by public opinion far exceeds the limits
prescribed by the ordinary rules of law. The ministry, who are responsible to
impeachment, are at all times animadverted on by the press with peculiar freedom,
and during the elections for the House of Commons, the other responsible part of the
Government, the press is employed with as little reserve towards the candidates.

The practice in America must be entitled to much more respect. In every State,
probably, in the Union, the press has exerted a freedom in canvassing the merits and
measures of public men of every description which has not been confined to the strict


limits of the common law. On this footing the freedom of the press has stood; on this
footing it yet stands. And it will not be a breach either of truth or of candour to say,
that no persons or presses are in the habit of more unrestrained animadversions on the
proceedings and functionaries of the State governments than the persons and presses
most zealous in vindicating the act of Congress for punishing similar animadversions
on the Government of the United States.

The last remark will not be understood as claiming for the State governments an
immunity greater than they have heretofore enjoyed. Some degree of abuse is
inseparable from the proper use of every thing, and in no instance is this more true
than in that of the press. It has accordingly been decided by the practice of the States,
that it is better to leave a few of its noxious branches to their luxuriant growth, than,
by pruning them away, to injure the vigour of those yielding the proper fruits. And
can the wisdom of this policy be doubted by any who reflect that to the press alone,
chequered as it is with abuses, the world is indebted for all the triumphs which have
been gained by reason and humanity over error and oppression; who reflect that to the
same beneficent source the United States owe much of the lights which conducted
them to the ranks of a free and independent nation, and which have improved their
political system into a shape so auspicious to their happiness? Had “Sedition Acts,”
forbidding every publication that might bring the constituted agents into contempt or
disrepute, or that might excite the hatred of the people against the authors of unjust or
pernicious measures, been uniformly enforced against the press, might not the United
States have been languishing at this day under the infirmities of a sickly
Confederation? Might they not, possibly, be miserable colonies, groaning under a
foreign yoke?

To these observations one fact will be added, which demonstrates that the common
law cannot be admitted as the universal expositor of American terms, which may be
the same with those contained in that law. The freedom of conscience and of religion
are found in the same instruments which assert the freedom of the press. It will never
be admitted that the meaning of the former, in the common law of England, is to limit
their meaning in the United States.

Whatever weight may be allowed to these considerations, the committee do not,
however, by any means intend to rest the question on them. They contend that the
article of amendment, instead of supposing in Congress a power that might be
exercised over the press, provided its freedom was not abridged, was meant as a
positive denial to Congress of any power whatever on the subject.

To demonstrate that this was the true object of the article, it will be sufficient to recall
the circumstances which led to it, and to refer to the explanation accompanying the
article.

When the Constitution was under the discussions which preceded its ratification, it is
well known that great apprehensions were expressed by many, lest the omission of
some positive exception, from the powers delegated, of certain rights, and of the
freedom of the press particularly, might expose them to the danger of being drawn, by
construction, within some of the powers vested in Congress, more especially of the


power to make all laws necessary and proper for carrying their other powers into
execution. In reply to this objection, it was invariably urged to be a fundamental and
characteristic principle of the Constitution, that all powers not given by it were
reserved; that no powers were given beyond those enumerated in the Constitution, and
such as were fairly incident to them; that the power over the rights in question, and
particularly over the press, was neither among the enumerated powers, nor incident to
any of them; and consequently that an exercise of any such power would be manifest
usurpation. It is painful to remark how much the arguments now employed in behalf
of the Sedition Act are at variance with the reasoning which then justified the
Constitution, and invited its ratification.

From this posture of the subject resulted the interesting question, in so many of the
Conventions, whether the doubts and dangers ascribed to the Constitution should be
removed by any amendments previous to the ratification, or be postponed in
confidence that, as far as they might be proper, they would be introduced in the form
provided by the Constitution. The latter course was adopted; and in most of the States,
ratifications were followed by propositions and instructions for rendering the
Constitution more explicit, and more safe to the rights not meant to be delegated by it.
Among those rights, the freedom of the press, in most instances, is particularly and
emphatically mentioned. The firm and very pointed manner in which it is asserted in
the proceedings of the Convention of this State will be hereafter seen.

In pursuance of the wishes thus expressed, the first Congress that assembled under the
Constitution proposed certain amendments, which have since, by the necessary
ratifications, been made a part of it; among which amendments is the article
containing, among other prohibitions on the Congress, an express declaration that
they should make no law abridging the freedom of the press.

Without tracing farther the evidence on this subject, it would seem scarcely possible
to doubt that no power whatever over the press was supposed to be delegated by the
Constitution, as it originally stood, and that the amendment was intended as a positive
and absolute reservation of it.

But the evidence is still stronger. The proposition of amendments made by Congress
is introduced in the following terms:

“The Conventions of a number of the States having, at the time of their adopting the
Constitution, expressed a desire, in order to prevent misconstructions or abuse of its
powers, that further declaratory and restrictive clauses should be added, and as
extending the ground of public confidence in the Government will best insure the
beneficent ends of its institution.”

Here is the most satisfactory and authentic proof that the several amendments
proposed were to be considered as either declaratory or restrictive, and, whether the
one or the other as corresponding with the desire expressed by a number of the States,
and as extending the ground of public confidence in the Government.


Under any other construction of the amendment relating to the press, than that it
declared the press to be wholly exempt from the power of Congress, the amendment
could neither be said to correspond with the desire expressed by a number of the
States, nor be calculated to extend the ground of public confidence in the
Government.

Nay, more; the construction employed to justify the Sedition Act would exhibit a
phenomenon without a parallel in the political world. It would exhibit a number of
respectable States, as denying, first, that any power over the press was delegated by
the Constitution; as proposing, next, that an amendment to it should explicitly declare
that no such power was delegated; and, finally, as concurring in an amendment
actually recognising or delegating such a power.

Is, then, the Federal Government, it will be asked, destitute of every authority for
restraining the licentiousness of the press, and for shielding itself against the libellous
attacks which may be made on those who administer it?

The Constitution alone can answer this question. If no such power be expressly
delegated, and if it be not both necessary and proper to carry into execution an express
power—above all, if it be expressly forbidden, by a declaratory amendment to the
Constitution—the answer must be, that the Federal Government is destitute of all such
authority.

And might it not be asked, in turn, whether it is not more probable, under all the
circumstances which have been reviewed, that the authority should be withheld by the
Constitution, than that it should be left to a vague and violent construction, whilst so
much pains were bestowed in enumerating other powers, and so many less important
powers are included in the enumeration?

Might it not be likewise asked, whether the anxious circumspection which dictated so
many peculiar limitations on the general authority would be unlikely to exempt the
press altogether from that authority? The peculiar magnitude of some of the powers
necessarily committed to the Federal Government; the peculiar duration required for
the functions of some of its departments; the peculiar distance of the seat of its
proceedings from the great body of its constituents; and the peculiar difficulty of
circulating an adequate knowledge of them through any other channel; will not these
considerations, some or other of which produced other exceptions from the powers of
ordinary governments, all together, account for the policy of binding the hand of the
Federal Government from touching the channel which alone can give efficacy to its
responsibility to its constituents, and of leaving those who administer it to a remedy,
for their injured reputations, under the same laws, and in the same tribunals, which
protect their lives, their liberties, and their properties?

But the question does not turn either on the wisdom of the Constitution or on the
policy which gave rise to its particular organization. It turns on the actual meaning of
the instrument, by which it has appeared that a power over the press is clearly
excluded from the number of powers delegated to the Federal Government.


3. And, in the opinion of the committee, well may it be said, as the resolution
concludes with saying, that the unconstitutional power exercised over the press by the
Sedition Act ought, “more than any other, to produce universal alarm; because it is
levelled against that right of freely examining public characters and measures, and of
free communication among the people thereon, which has ever been justly deemed the
only effectual guardian of every other right.”

Without scrutinizing minutely into all the provisions of the Sedition Act, it will be
sufficient to cite so much of section 2d as follows: “And be it further enacted, that if
any person shall write, print, utter, or publish, or shall cause or procure to be written,
printed, uttered, or published, or shall knowingly and willingly assist or aid in writing,
printing, uttering, or publishing, any false, scandalous, and malicious writing or
writings against the Government of the United States, or either house of the Congress
of the United States, or the President of the United States, with an intent to defame the
said Government or either house of the said Congress, or the President, or to bring
them or either of them into contempt or disrepute, or to excite against them, or either
or any of them, the hatred of the good people of the United States, &c.—then such
person, being thereof convicted before any court of the United States having
jurisdiction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars,
and by imprisonment not exceeding two years.”

On this part of the act, the following observations present themselves:

1. The Constitution supposes that the President, the Congress, and each of its Houses,
may not discharge their trusts, either from defect of judgment or other causes. Hence
they are all made responsible to their constituents, at the returning periods of election;
and the President, who is singly intrusted with very great powers, is, as a further
guard, subjected to an intermediate impeachment.

2. Should it happen, as the Constitution supposes it may happen, that either of these
branches of the Government may not have duly discharged its trust; it is natural and
proper, that, according to the cause and degree of their faults, they should be brought
into contempt or disrepute, and incur the hatred of the people.

3. Whether it has, in any case, happened that the proceedings of either or all of those
branches evince such a violation of duty as to justify a contempt, a disrepute, or
hatred among the people, can only be determined by a free examination thereof, and a
free communication among the people thereon.

4. Whenever it may have actually happened that proceedings of this sort are
chargeable on all or either of the branches of the Government, it is the duty, as well as
right, of intelligent and faithful citizens to discuss and promulge them freely, as well
to control them by the censorship of the public opinion, as to promote a remedy
according to the rules of the Constitution. And it cannot be avoided that those who are
to apply the remedy must feel, in some degree, a contempt or hatred against the
transgressing party.


5. As the act was passed on July 14, 1798, and is to be in force until March 3, 1801, it
was of course that, during its continuance, two elections of the entire House of
Representatives, an election of a part of the Senate, and an election of a President,
were to take place.

6. That, consequently, during all these elections, intended by the Constitution to
preserve the purity or to purge the faults of the Administration, the great remedial
rights of the people were to be exercised, and the responsibility of their public agents
to be screened, under the penalties of this act.

May it not be asked of every intelligent friend to the liberties of his country, whether
the power exercised in such an act as this ought not to produce great and universal
alarm? Whether a rigid execution of such an act, in time past, would not have
repressed that information and communication among the people which is
indispensable to the just exercise of their electoral rights? And whether such an act, if
made perpetual, and enforced with rigor, would not, in time to come, either destroy
our free system of government, or prepare a convulsion that might prove equally fatal
to it?

In answer to such questions, it has been pleaded that the writings and publications
forbidden by the act are those only which are false and malicious, and intended to
defame, and merit is claimed for the privilege allowed to authors to justify, by proving
the truth of their publications, and for the limitations to which the sentence of fine and
imprisonment is subjected.

To those who concurred in the act, under the extraordinary belief that the option lay
between the passing of such an act and leaving in force the common law of libels,
which punishes truth equally with falsehood, and submits the fine and imprisonment
to the indefinite discretion of the court, the merit of good intentions ought surely not
to be refused. A like merit may perhaps be due for the discontinuance of the corporal
punishment, which the common law also leaves to the discretion of the court. This
merit of intention, however, would have been greater, if the several mitigations had
not been limited to so short a period; and the apparent inconsistency would have been
avoided, between justifying the act, at one time, by contrasting it with the rigors of the
common law otherwise in force; and at another time, by appealing to the nature of the
crisis, as requiring the temporary rigor exerted by the act.

But, whatever may have been the meritorious intentions of all or any who contributed
to the Sedition Act, a very few reflections will prove that its baleful tendency is little
diminished by the privilege of giving in evidence the truth of the matter contained in
political writings.

In the first place, where simple and naked facts alone are in question, there is
sufficient difficulty in some cases, and sufficient trouble and vexation in all, of
meeting a prosecution from the Government with the full and formal proof necessary
in a court of law.


But in the next place, it must be obvious to the plainest minds, that opinions and
inferences, and conjectural observations, are not only in many cases inseparable from
the facts, but may often be more the objects of the prosecution than the facts
themselves; or may even be altogether abstracted from particular facts; and that
opinions, and inferences, and conjectural observations, cannot be subjects of that kind
of proof which appertains to facts, before a court of law.

Again: it is no less obvious that the intent to defame, or bring into contempt, or
disrepute, or hatred—which is made a condition of the offence created by the
act—cannot prevent its pernicious influence on the freedom of the press. For, omitting
the inquiry, how far the malice of the intent is an inference of the law from the mere
publication, it is manifestly impossible to punish the intent to bring those who
administer the Government into disrepute or contempt, without striking at the right of
freely discussing public characters and measures; because those who engage in such
discussions must expect and intend to excite these unfavorable sentiments, so far as
they may be thought to be deserved. To prohibit, therefore, the intent to excite those
unfavorable sentiments against those who administer the Government, is equivalent to
a prohibition of the actual excitement of them; and to prohibit the actual excitement of
them is equivalent to a prohibition of discussions having that tendency and effect;
which, again, is equivalent to a protection of those who administer the Government, if
they should at any time deserve the contempt or hatred of the people, against being
exposed to it by free animadversions on their characters and conduct. Nor can there be
a doubt, if those in public trust be shielded by penal laws from such strictures of the
press as may expose them to contempt, or disrepute or hatred, where they may
deserve it, that, in exact proportion as they may deserve to be exposed, will be the
certainty and criminality of the intent to expose them, and the vigilance of prosecuting
and punishing it; nor a doubt that a government thus intrenched in penal statutes
against the just and natural effects of a culpable administration will easily evade the
responsibility which is essential to a faithful discharge of its duty.

Let it be recollected, lastly, that the right of electing the members of the Government
constitutes more particularly the essence of a free and responsible government. The
value and efficacy of this right depends on the knowledge of the comparative merits
and demerits of the candidates for public trust, and on the equal freedom,
consequently, of examining and discussing these merits and demerits of the
candidates respectively. It has been seen that a number of important elections will
take place while the act is in force, although it should not be continued beyond the
term to which it is limited. Should there happen, then, as is extremely probable in
relation to some or other of the branches of the Government, to be competitions
between those who are and those who are not members of the Government, what will
be the situations of the competitors? Not equal; because the characters of the former
will be covered by the Sedition Act from animadversions exposing them to disrepute
among the people, whilst the latter may be exposed to the contempt and hatred of the
people without a violation of the act. What will be the situation of the people? Not
free; because they will be compelled to make their election between competitors
whose pretensions they are not permitted by the act equally to examine, to discuss,
and to ascertain. And from both these situations will not those in power derive an


undue advantage for continuing themselves in it, which, by impairing the right of
election, endangers the blessings of the Government founded on it?

It is with justice, therefore, that the General Assembly have affirmed, in the
resolution, as well that the right of freely examining public characters and measures,
and of free communication thereon, is the only effectual guardian of every other right,
as that this particular right is levelled at by the power exercised in the Sedition Act.

The Resolution next in order is as follows:

“That this State having, by its Convention, which ratified the Federal Constitution,
expressly declared that, among other essential rights, ‘the liberty of conscience and of
the press cannot be cancelled, abridged, restrained, or modified, by any authority of
the United States;’ and, from its extreme anxiety to guard these rights from every
possible attack of sophistry and ambition, having, with other States, recommended an
amendment for that purpose, which amendment was in due time annexed to the
Constitution, it would mark a reproachful inconsistency, and criminal degeneracy, if
an indifference were now shown to the most palpable violation of one of the rights
thus declared and secured, and to the establishment of a precedent which may be fatal
to the other.”

To place this Resolution in its just light, it will be necessary to recur to the act of
ratification by Virginia, which stands in the ensuing form:

“We, the delegates of the people of Virginia, duly elected in pursuance of a
recommendation from the General Assembly and now met in Convention, having
fully and freely investigated and discussed the proceedings of the Federal Convention,
and being prepared, as well as the most mature deliberation hath enabled us, to decide
thereon—do, in the name and in behalf of the people of Virginia declare and make
known that the powers granted under the Constitution, being derived from the people
of the United States, may be resumed by them whensoever the same shall be
perverted to their injury or oppression; and that every power not granted thereby
remains with them, and at their will. That, therefore, no right of any denomination can
be cancelled, abridged, restrained, or modified, by the Congress, by the Senate or
House of Representatives, acting in any capacity, by the President, or any department
or officer of the United States, except in those instances in which power is given by
the Constitution for those purposes; and that, among other essential rights, the liberty
of conscience and of the press cannot be cancelled, abridged, restrained, or modified,
by any authority of the United States.”

Here is an express and solemn declaration by the Convention of the State, that they
ratified the Constitution in the sense that no right of any denomination can be
cancelled, abridged, restrained, or modified, by the Government of the United States,
or any part of it, except in those instances in which power is given by the
Constitution; and in the sense, particularly, “that among other essential rights, the
liberty of conscience and freedom of the press cannot be cancelled, abridged,
restrained, or modified, by any authority of the United States.”


Words could not well express in a fuller or more forcible manner the understanding of
the Convention, that the liberty of conscience and the freedom of the press were
equally and completely exempted from all authority whatever of the United States.

Under an anxiety to guard more effectually these rights against every possible danger,
the Convention, after ratifying the Constitution, proceeded to prefix to certain
amendments proposed by them a declaration of rights, in which are two articles
providing, the one for the liberty of conscience, the other for the freedom of speech
and of the press.

Similar recommendations having proceeded from a number of other States, and
Congress, as has been seen, having, in consequence thereof, and with a view to extend
the ground of public confidence, proposed, among other declaratory and restrictive
clauses, a clause expressly securing the liberty of conscience and of the press, and
Virginia having concurred in the ratifications which made them a part of the
Constitution, it will remain with a candid public to decide whether it would not mark
an inconsistency and degeneracy, if an indifference were now shown to a palpable
violation of one of those rights—the freedom of the press; and to a precedent, therein,
which may be fatal to the other—the free exercise of religion.

That the precedent established by the violation of the former of these rights may, as is
affirmed by the resolution, be fatal to the latter, appears to be demonstrable by a
comparison of the grounds on which they respectively rest, and from the scope of
reasoning by which the power over the former has been vindicated.

First. Both of these rights, the liberty of conscience and of the press, rest equally on
the original ground of not being delegated by the Constitution, and, consequently,
withheld from the Government. Any construction, therefore, that would attack this
original security for the one must have the like effect on the other.

Secondly. They are both equally secured by the supplement to the Constitution, being
both included in the same amendment, made at the same time, and by the same
authority. Any construction or argument, then, which would turn the amendment into
a grant or acknowledgment of power with respect to the press, might be equally
applied to the freedom of religion.

Thirdly. If it be admitted that the extent of the freedom of the press secured by the
amendment is to be measured by the common law on this subject, the same authority
may be resorted to for the standard which is to fix the extent of the “free exercise of
religion.” It cannot be necessary to say what this standard would be; whether the
common law be taken solely as the unwritten, or as varied by the written law of
England.

Fourthly. If the words and phrases in the amendment are to be considered as chosen
with a studied discrimination, which yields an argument for a power over the press
under the limitation that its freedom be not abridged, the same argument results from
the same consideration for a power over the exercise of religion, under the limitation
that its freedom be not prohibited.


For if Congress may regulate the freedom of the press, provided they do not abridge
it, because it is said only “they shall not abridge it,” and is not said “they shall make
no law respecting it,” the analogy of reasoning is conclusive that Congress may
regulate and even abridge the free exercise of religion, provided they do not prohibit
it; because it is said only “they shall not prohibit it,” and is not said “they shall make
no law respecting, or no law abridging it.”

The General Assembly were governed by the clearest reason, then, in considering the
Sedition Act, which legislates on the freedom of the press, as establishing a precedent
that may be fatal to the liberty of conscience; and it will be the duty of all, in
proportion as they value the security of the latter, to take the alarm at every
encroachment on the former.

The two concluding resolutions only remain to be examined. They are in the words
following:

“That the good people of this Commonwealth having ever felt, and continuing to feel,
the most sincere affection for their brethren of the other States, the truest anxiety for
establishing and perpetuating the Union of all, and the most scrupulous fidelity to that
Constitution which is the pledge of mutual friendship and the instrument of mutual
happiness, the General Assembly doth solemnly appeal to the like dispositions in the
other States, in confidence that they will concur with this Commonwealth in
declaring, as it does hereby declare, that the acts aforesaid are unconstitutional; and
that the necessary and proper measures will be taken by each for co-operating with
this State in maintaining, unimpaired, the authorities, rights, and liberties reserved to
the States respectively, or to the people.

“That the Governor be desired to transmit a copy of the foregoing resolutions to the
executive authority of each of the other States, with a request that the same may be
communicated to the Legislature thereof; and that a copy be furnished to each of the
Senators and Representatives representing this State in the Congress of the United
States.”

The fairness and regularity of the course of proceeding here pursued have not
protected it against objections even from sources too respectable to be disregarded.

It has been said that it belongs to the judiciary of the United States, and not the State
Legislatures, to declare the meaning of the Federal Constitution.

But a declaration that proceedings of the Federal Government are not warranted by
the Constitution is a novelty neither among the citizens nor among the Legislatures of
the States; nor are the citizens or the Legislature of Virginia singular in the example
of it.

Nor can the declarations of either, whether affirming or denying the constitutionality
of measures of the Federal Government, or whether made before or after judicial
decisions thereon, be deemed, in any point of view, an assumption of the office of the
judge. The declarations in such cases are expressions of opinion, unaccompanied with


any other effect than what they may produce on opinion by exciting reflection. The
expositions of the judiciary, on the other hand, are carried into immediate effect by
force. The former may lead to a change in the legislative expression of the general
will—possibly, to a change in the opinion of the judiciary, the latter enforces the
general will, whilst that will and that opinion continue unchanged.

And if there be no impropriety in declaring the unconstitutionality of proceedings in
the Federal Government, where can be the impropriety of communicating the
declaration to other States, and inviting their concurrence in a like declaration? What
is allowable for one must be allowable for all; and a free communication among the
States, where the Constitution imposes no restraint, is as allowable among the State
governments as among other public bodies or private citizens. This consideration
derives a weight that cannot be denied to it, from the relation of the State Legislatures
to the Federal Legislature as the immediate constituents of one of its branches.

The Legislatures of the States have a right also to originate amendments to the
Constitution, by a concurrence of two-thirds of the whole number, in applications to
Congress for the purpose. When new States are to be formed by a junction of two or
more States, or parts of States, the Legislatures of the States concerned are, as well as
Congress, to concur in the measure. The States have a right also to enter into
agreements or compacts, with the consent of Congress. In all such cases a
communication among them results from the object which is common to them.

It is, lastly, to be seen whether the confidence expressed by the resolution, that the
necessary and proper measures would be taken by the other States for co-operating
with Virginia in maintaining the rights reserved to the States or to the people, be in
any degree liable to the objections which have been raised against it.

If it be liable to objection it must be because either the object or the means are
objectionable.

The object being to maintain what the Constitution has ordained, is in itself a laudable
object.

The means are expressed in the terms “the necessary and proper measures.” A proper
object was to be pursued by means both necessary and proper.

To find an objection, then, it must be shown that some meaning was annexed to these
general terms which was not proper; and for this purpose either that the means used
by the General Assembly were an example of improper means, or that there were no
proper means to which the terms could refer.

In the example given by the State of declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts to be
unconstitutional, and of communicating the declaration to other States, no trace of
improper means has appeared. And if the other States had concurred in making a like
declaration, supported, too, by the numerous applications flowing immediately from
the people, it can scarcely be doubted that these simple means would have been as
sufficient as they are unexceptionable.


It is no less certain, that other means might have been employed which are strictly
within the limits of the Constitution. The Legislatures of the States might have made a
direct representation to Congress with a view to obtain a rescinding of the two
offensive acts; or they might have represented to their respective Senators in Congress
their wish that two-thirds thereof would propose an explanatory amendment to the
Constitution; or two-thirds of themselves, if such had been their option, might, by an
application to Congress, have obtained a Convention for the same object.

These several means, though not equally eligible in themselves, nor, probably, to the
States, were all constitutionally open for consideration. And if the General Assembly,
after declaring the two acts to be unconstitutional, the first and most obvious
proceeding on the subject, did not undertake to point out to the other States a choice
among the farther measures that might become necessary and proper, the reserve will
not be misconstrued by liberal minds into any culpable imputation.

These observations appear to form a satisfactory reply to every objection which is not
founded on a misconception of the terms employed in the resolutions. There is one
other, however, which may be of too much importance not to be added. It cannot be
forgotten, that among the arguments addressed to those who apprehend danger to
liberty from the establishment of the General Government over so great a country, the
appeal was emphatically made to the intermediate existence of the State governments,
between the people and that Government; to the vigilance with which they would
descry the first symptoms of usurpation; and to the promptitude with which they
would sound the alarm to the public. This argument was probably not without its
effect; and if it was a proper one then to recommend the establishment of the
Constitution, it must be a proper one now to assist in its interpretation.

The only part of the two concluding resolutions that remains to be noticed is, the
repetition, in the first, of that warm affection to the Union and its members, and of
that scrupulous fidelity to the Constitution, which have been invariably felt by the
people of this State. As the proceedings were introduced with these sentiments, they
could not be more properly closed than in the same manner. Should there be any so
far misled as to call in question the sincerity of these professions, whatever regret may
be excited by the error, the General Assembly cannot descend into a discussion of it.
Those who have listened to the suggestion can only be left to their own recollection of
the part which this State has borne in the establishment of our National Independence,
in the establishment of our National Constitution, and in maintaining under it the
authority and laws of the Union, without a single exception of internal resistence or
commotion. By recurring to these facts they will be able to convince themselves that
the Representatives of the people of Virginia must be above the necessity of opposing
any other shield to attacks on their national patriotism than their own
conscientiousness and the justice of an enlightened public, who will perceive in the
resolutions themselves the strongest evidence of attachment both to the Constitution
and to the Union, since it is only by maintaining the different governments and
departments within their respective limits that the blessings of either can be
perpetuated.


The extensive view of the subject thus taken by the committee has led them to report
to the House, as the result of the whole, the following Resolution:

Resolved, That the General Assembly having carefully and respectfully attended to
the proceedings of a number of the States, in answer to their resolutions of December
21, 1798, and having accurately and fully re-examined and reconsidered the latter,
find it to be their indispensable duty to adhere to the same, as founded in truth, as
consonant with the Constitution, and as conducive to its preservation; and more
especially to be their duty to renew, as they do hereby renew, their protest against “the
Alien and Sedition Acts,” as palpable and alarming infractions of the Constitution.