To: Thomas Jefferson
Date: February 4, 1790

---

Your favor of the 9th. of Jany. inclosing one of Sepr. last
did not get to hand till a few days ago. The idea which the
latter evolves is a great one, and suggests many interesting
reflections to legislators; particularly when contracting and
providing for public debts. Whether it can be received in
the extent your reasonings give it, is a question which I
ought to turn more in my thoughts than I have yet been
able to do, before I should be justified in making up a full
opinion on it. My first thoughts though coinciding with
many of yours, lead me to view the doctrine as not in all
respects compatible with the course of human affairs. I
will endeavor to sketch the grounds of my skepticism.

"As the earth belongs to the living, not to the dead, a
living generation can bind itself only: In every society
the will of the majority binds the whole: According to
the laws of mortality, a majority of those ripe at any moment
for the exercise of their will do not live beyond
nineteen years: To that term then is limited the validity
of every act of the Society: Nor within that limitation, can
any declaration of the public will be valid which is not
express."

This I understand to be the outline of the argument.

The Acts of a political Society may be divided into three
classes.

1. The fundamental Constitution of the Government.

2. Laws involving stipulations which render them irrevocable
at the will of the Legislature

3. Laws involving no such irrevocable quality.

However applicable in Theory the doctrine may be to a
Constitution, in [sic] seems liable in practice to some very
powerful objections. Would not a Government so often revised
become too mutable to retain those prejudices in its
favor which antiquity inspires, and which are perhaps a
salutary aid to the most rational Government in the most
enlightened age? Would not such a periodical revision engender
pernicious factions that might not otherwise come
into existence? Would not, in fine, a Government depending
for its existence beyond a fixed date, on some positive
and authentic intervention of the Society itself, be too subject
to the casualty and consequences of an actual interregnum?

In the 2d. class, exceptions at least to the doctrine seem
to be requisite both in Theory and practice.

If the earth be the gift of nature to the living their title
can extend to the earth in its natural State only. The improvements
made by the dead form a charge against the
living who take the benefit of them. This charge can no
otherwise be satisfyed than by executing the will of the
dead accompanying the improvements.

Debts may be incurred for purposes which interest the
unborn, as well as the living: such are debts for repelling
a conquest, the evils of which descend through many generations.
Debts may even be incurred principally for the
benefit of posterity: such perhaps is the present debt of
the U. States, which far exceeds any burdens which the
present generation could well apprehend for itself. The
term of 19 years might not be sufficient for discharging
the debts in either of these cases.

There seems then to be a foundation in the nature of
things, in the relation which one generation bears to another,
for the descent of obligations from one to another.
Equity requires it. Mutual good is promoted by it. All that
is indispensable in adjusting the account between the dead
& the living is to see that the debits against the latter do
not exceed the advances made by the former. Few of the
incumbrances entailed on Nations would bear a liquidation
even on this principle.

The objections to the doctrine as applied to the 3d. class
of acts may perhaps be merely practical. But in that view
they appear to be of great force.

Unless such laws should be kept in force by new acts
regularly anticipating the end of the term, all the rights
depending on positive laws, that is, most of the rights of
property would become absolutely defunct; and the most
violent struggles be generated between those interested in
reviving and those interested in new-modelling the former
State of property. Nor would events of this kind be improbable.
The obstacles to the passage of laws which render
a power to repeal inferior to an opportunity of rejecting,
as a security agst. oppression, would here render an
opportunity of rejecting, an insecure provision agst. anarchy.
Add, that the possibility of an event so hazardous to
the rights of property could not fail to depreciate its value;
that the approach of the crisis would increase this effect;
that the frequent return of periods superseding all the obligations
depending on antecedent laws & usages, must by
weak[en]ing the reverence for those obligations, co-operate
with motives to licentiousness already too powerful;
and that the uncertainty incident to such a state of things
would on one side discourage the steady exertions of industry
produced by permanent laws, and on the other,
give a disproportionate advantage to the more, over the
less, sagacious and interprizing part of the Society.

I find no relief from these consequences, but in the received
doctrine that a tacit assent may be given to established
Constitutions and laws, and that this assent may be
inferred, where no positive dissent appears. It seems less
impracticable to remedy, by wise plans of Government, the
dangerous operation of this doctrine, than to find a remedy
for the difficulties inseparable from the other.

May it not be questioned whether it be possible to exclude
wholly the idea of tacit assent, without subverting
the foundation of civil Society? On what principle does the
voice of the majority bind the minority? It does not result
I conceive from the law of nature, but from compact
founded on conveniency. A greater proportion might be
required by the fundamental constitution of a Society, if it
were judged eligible. Prior then to the establishment of
this principle, unanimity was necessary; and strict Theory
at all times presupposses the assent of every member to
the establishment of the rule itself. If this assent can not
be given tacitly, or be not implied where no positive evidence
forbids, persons born in Society would not on attaining
ripe age be bound by acts of the Majority; and either
a unanimous repetition of every law would be
necessary on the accession of new members, or an express
assent must be obtained from these to the rule by which
the voice of the Majority is made the voice of the whole.

If the observations I have hazarded be not misapplied,
it follows that a limitation of the validity of national acts to
the computed life of a nation, is in some instances not required
by Theory, and in others cannot be accomodated
to practice. The observations are not meant however to
impeach either the utility of the principle in some particular
cases; or the general importance of it in the eye of the
philosophical Legislator. On the contrary it would give me
singular pleasure to see it first announced in the proceedings
of the U. States, and always kept in their view, as a
salutary curb on the living generation from imposing unjust
or unnecessary burdens on their successors. But this is
a pleasure which I have little hope of enjoying. The spirit
of philosophical legislation has never reached some parts
of the Union, and is by no means the fashion here, either
within or without Congress. The evils suffered & feared
from weakness in Government, and licentiousness in the
people, have turned the attention more towards the means
of strengthening the former, than of narrowing its extent
in the minds of the latter. Besides this, it is so much easier
to espy the little difficulties immediately incident to every
great plan, than to comprehend its general and remote
benefits, that our hemisphere must be still more enlightened
before many of the sublime truths which are seen
thro' the medium of Philosophy, become visible to the naked
eye of the ordinary Politician.
