ADDRESS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO THE
PEOPLE OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA.

Fellow-Citizens,—

Unwilling to shrink from our representative responsibility, conscious of the purity of
our motives, but acknowledging your right to supervise our conduct, we invite your
serious attention to the emergency which dictated the subjoined resolutions. Whilst
we disdain to alarm you by ill-founded jealousies, we recommend an investigation,
guided by the coolness of wisdom, and a decision bottomed on firmness but tempered
with moderation.

It would be perfidious in those entrusted with the guardianship of the State
sovereignty, and acting under the solemn obligation of the following oath, “I do swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States,” not to warn you of
encroachments which, though clothed with the pretext of necessity, or disguised by
arguments of expediency, may yet establish precedents which may ultimately devote a
generous and unsuspicious people to all the consequences of usurped power.

Encroachments springing from a government whose organization can not be
maintained without the co-operation of the States, furnish the strongest excitements
upon the State Legislatures to watchfulness, and impose upon them the strongest
obligation to preserve unimpaired the line of partition.

The acquiescence of the States under infractions of the federal compact, would either
beget a speedy consolidation, by precipitating the State governments into impotency
and contempt; or prepare the way for a revolution, by a repetition of these infractions,
until the people are roused to appear in the majesty of their strength. It is to avoid
these calamities that we exhibit to the people the momentous question, whether the
Constitution of the United States shall yield to a construction which defies every
restraint and overwhelms the best hopes of republicanism.

Exhortations to disregard domestic usurpation, until foreign danger shall have passed,
is an artifice which may be forever used; because the possessors of power, who are
the advocates for its extension, can ever create national embarrassments, to be
successively employed to soothe the people into sleep, whilst that power is swelling,
silently, secretly, and fatally. Of the same character are insinuations of a foreign
influence, which seize upon a laudable enthusiasm against danger from abroad, and
distort it by an unnatural application, so as to blind your eyes against danger at home.

The sedition act presents a scene which was never expected by the early friends of the
Constitution. It was then admitted that the State sovereignties were only diminished
by powers specifically enumerated, or necessary to carry the specified powers into
effect. Now, Federal authority is deduced from implication; and from the existence of
State law, it is inferred that Congress possess a similar power of legislation; whence
Congress will be endowed with a power of legislation in all cases whatsoever, and the
States will be stripped of every right reserved, by the concurrent claims of a
paramount Legislature.

The sedition act is the offspring of these tremendous pretensions, which inflict a
death-wound on the sovereignty of the States.

For the honor of American understanding, we will not believe that the people have
been allured into the adoption of the Constitution by an affectation of defining
powers, whilst the preamble would admit a construction which would erect the will of
Congress into a power paramount in all cases, and therefore limited in none. On the
contrary, it is evident that the objects for which the Constitution was formed were
deemed attainable only by a particular enumeration and specification of each power
granted to the Federal Government; reserving all others to the people, or to the States.
And yet it is in vain we search for any specified power embracing the right of
legislation against the freedom of the press.

Had the States been despoiled of their sovereignty by the generality of the preamble,
and had the Federal Government been endowed with whatever they should judge to
be instrumental towards union, justice, tranquillity, common defence, general welfare,
and the preservation of liberty, nothing could have been more frivolous than an
enumeration of powers.

It is vicious in the extreme to calumniate meritorious public servants; but it is both
artful and vicious to arouse the public indignation against calumny in order to conceal
usurpation. Calumny is forbidden by the laws, usurpation by the Constitution.
Calumny injures individuals, usurpation, States. Calumny may be redressed by the
common judicatures; usurpation can only be controlled by the act of society. Ought
usurpation, which is most mischievous, to be rendered less hateful by calumny,
which, though injurious, is in a degree less pernicious? But the laws for the correction
of calumny were not defective. Every libellous writing or expression might receive its
punishment in the State courts, from juries summoned by an officer, who does not
receive his appointment from the President, and is under no influence to court the
pleasure of Government, whether it injured public officers or private citizens. Nor is
there any distinction in the Constitution empowering Congress exclusively to punish
calumny directed against an officer of the General Government; so that a construction
assuming the power of protecting the reputation of a citizen officer will extend to the
case of any other citizen, and open to Congress a right of legislation in every
conceivable case which can arise between individuals.

In answer to this, it is urged that every Government possesses an inherent power of
self-preservation, entitling it to do whatever it shall judge necessary for that purpose.

This is a repetition of the doctrine of implication and expediency in different
language, and admits of a similar and decisive answer, namely, that as the powers of
Congress are defined, powers inherent, implied, or expedient, are obviously the
creatures of ambition; because the care expended in defining powers would otherwise
have been superfluous. Powers extracted from such sources will be indefinitely
multipled by the aid of armies and patronage, which, with the impossibility of
controlling them by any demarcation, would presently terminate reasoning, and
ultimately swallow up the State sovereignties.

So insatiable is a love of power that it has resorted to a distinction between the
freedom and licentiousness of the press for the purpose of converting the third
amendment of the Constitution, which was dictated by the most lively anxiety to
preserve that freedom, into an instrument for abridging it. Thus usurpation even
justifies itself by a precaution against usurpation; and thus an amendment universally
designed to quiet every fear is adduced as the source of an act which has produced
general terror and alarm.

The distinction between liberty and licentiousness is still a repetition of the Protean
doctrine of implication, which is ever ready to work its ends by varying its shape. By
its help, the judge as to what is licentious may escape through any constitutional
restriction. Under it men of a particular religious opinion might be excluded from
office, because such exclusion would not amount to an establishment of religion, and
because it might be said that their opinions are licentious. And under it Congress
might denominate a religion to be heretical and licentious, and proceed to its
suppression. Remember that precedents once established are so much positive power;
and that the nation which reposes on the pillow of political confidence, will sooner or
later end its political existence in a deadly lethargy. Remember, also, that it is to the
press mankind are indebted for having dispelled the clouds which long encompassed
religion, for disclosing her geniune lustre, and disseminating her salutary doctrines.

The sophistry of a distinction between the liberty and the licentiousness of the press is
so forcibly exposed in a late memorial from our late envoys to the Minister of the
French Republic, that we here present it to you in their own words:

“The genius of the Constitution, and the opinion of the people of the United States,
cannot be overruled by those who administer the Government. Among those
principles deemed sacred in America, among those sacred rights considered as
forming the bulwark of their liberty, which the Government contemplates with awful
reverence and would approach only with the most cautious circumspection, there is no
one of which the importance is more deeply impressed on the public mind than the
liberty of the press. That this liberty is often carried to excess; that it has sometimes
degenerated into licentiousness, is seen and lamented, but the remedy has not yet been
discovered. Perhaps it is an evil inseparable from the good with which it is allied;
perhaps it is a shoot which cannot be stripped from the stalk without wounding vitally
the plant from which it is torn. However desirable those measures might be which
might correct without enslaving the press, they have never yet been devised in
America. No regulations exist which enable the Government to suppress whatever
calumnies or invectives any individual may choose to offer to the public eye, or to
punish such calumnies and invectives otherwise than by a legal prosecution in courts
which are alike open to all who consider themselves as injured.”

As if we were bound to look for security from the personal probity of Congress
amidst the frailties of man, and not from the barriers of the Constitution, it has been
urged that the accused under the sedition act is allowed to prove the truth of the
charge. This argument will not for a moment disguise the unconstitutionality of the
act, if it be recollected that opinions as well as facts are made punishable, and that the
truth of an opinion is not susceptible of proof. By subjecting the truth of opinion to
the regulation, fine, and imprisonment, to be inflicted by those who are of a different
opinion, the free range of the human mind is injuriously restrained. The sacred
obligations of religion flow from the due exercise of opinion, in the solemn discharge
of which man is accountable to his God alone; yet, under this precedent the truth of
religion itself may be ascertained, and its pretended licentiousness punished by a jury
of a different creed from that held by the person accused. This law, then, commits the
double sacrilege of arresting reason in her progress towards perfection, and of placing
in a state of danger the free exercise of religious opinions. But where does the
Constitution allow Congress to create crimes and inflict punishment, provided they
allow the accused to exhibit evidence in his defense? This doctrine, united with the
assertion, that sedition is a common law offence, and therefore within the correcting
power of Congress, opens at once the hideous volumes of penal law, and turns loose
upon us the utmost invention of insatiable malice and ambition, which, in all ages,
have debauched morals, depressed liberty, shackled religion, supported despotism,
and deluged the scaffold with blood.

All the preceding arguments, arising from a deficiency of constitutional power in
Congress, apply to the alien act; and this act is liable to other objections peculiar to
itself. If a suspicion that aliens are dangerous constitute the justification of that power
exercised over them by Congress, then a similar suspicion will justify the exercise of
a similar power over natives; because there is nothing in the Constitution
distinguishing between the power of a State to permit the residence of natives and of
aliens. It is, therefore, a right originally possessed, and never surrendered, by the
respective States, and which is rendered dear and valuable to Virginia, because it is
assailed through the bosom of the Constitution, and because her peculiar situation
renders the easy admission of artisans and laborers an interest of vast importance.

But this bill contains other features, still more alarming and dangerous. It dispenses
with the trial by jury; it violates the judicial system; it confounds legislative,
executive, and judicial powers; it punishes without trial; and it bestows upon the
President despotic power over a numerous class of men. Are such measures consistent
with our constitutional principles? And will an accumulation of power so extensive in
the hands of the Executive, over aliens, secure to natives the blessings of republican
liberty?

If measures can mould governments, and if an uncontrolled power of construction is
surrendered to those who administer them, their progress may be easily foreseen, and
their end easily foretold. A lover of monarchy, who opens the treasures of corruption
by distributing emolument among devoted partisans, may at the same time be
approaching his object and deluding the people with professions of republicanism. He
may confound monarchy and republicanism, by the art of definition. He may varnish
over the dexterity which ambition never fails to display, with the pliancy of language,
the seduction of expediency, or the prejudices of the times; and he may come at length
to avow that so extensive a territory as that of the United States can only be governed
by the energies of monarchy; that it cannot be defended, except by standing armies;
and that it cannot be united except by consolidation.

Measures have already been adopted which may lead to these consequences. They
consist—

In fiscal systems and arrangements, which keep a host of commercial and wealthy
individuals imbodied, and obedient to the mandates of the treasury.

In armies and navies, which will, on the one hand, enlist the tendency of man to pay
homage to his fellow-creature who can feed or honor him; and on the other, employ
the principle of fear, by punishing imaginary insurrections, under the pretext of
preventive justice.

In the extensive establishment of a volunteer militia, rallied together by a political
creed, armed and officered by executive power, so as to deprive the States of their
constitutional right to appoint militia officers, and to place the great bulk of the people
in a defenceless situation.

In swarms of officers, civil and military, who can inculcate political tenets tending to
consolidation and monarchy both by indulgencies and severities; and can act as spies
over the free exercise of human reason.

In destroying, by the sedition act, the responsibility of public servants and public
measures to the people, thus retrograding towards the exploded doctrine “that the
administrators of the Government are the masters, and not the servants, of the
people,” and exposing America, which acquired the honour of taking the lead among
nations towards perfecting political principles, to the disgrace of returning first to
ancient ignorance and barbarism.

In exercising a power of depriving a portion of the people of that representation in
Congress bestowed by the Constitution.

In the adoration and efforts of some known to be rooted in enmity to Republican
Government, applauding and supporting measures by every contrivance calculated to
take advantage of the public confidence, which is allowed to be ingenious, but will be
fatally injurious.

In transferring to the Executive important legislative powers; particularly the power of
raising armies, and borrowing money without limitation of interest.

In restraining the freedom of the press, and investing the Executive with legislative,
executive, and judicial powers, over a numerous body of men.

And, that we may shorten the catalogue, in establishing, by successive precedents,
such a mode of construing the Constitution as will rapidly remove every restraint
upon Federal power.
Let history be consulted; let the man of experience reflect: nay, let the artificers of
monarchy be asked what further materials they can need for building up their favorite
system.

These are solemn but painful truths; and yet we recommend it to you not to forget the
possibility of danger from without, although danger threatens us from within.
Usurpation is indeed dreadful; but against foreign invasion, if that should happen, let
us rise with hearts and hands united, and repel the attack with the zeal of freemen who
will strengthen their title to examine and correct domestic measures, by having
defended their country against foreign aggression.

Pledged as we are, fellow-citizens, to these sacred engagements, we yet humbly and
fervently implore the Almighty Disposer of events to avert from our land war and
usurpation, the scourges of mankind; to permit our fields to be cultivated in peace; to
instil into nations the love of friendly intercourse; to suffer our youth to be educated
in virtue, and to preserve our morality from the pollution invariably incident to habits
of war; to prevent the laborer and husbandman from being harassed by taxes and
imposts; to remove from ambition the means of disturbing the commonwealth; to
annihilate all pretexts for power afforded by war; to maintain the Constitution; and to
bless our nation with tranquillity, under whose benign influence we may reach the
summit of happiness and glory, to which we are destined by nature and nature’s God.

Attest:

John Stewart, C. H. D.

1799, January 23. Agreed to by the Senate.

H. Brooke, C. S.

A true copy from the original deposited in the office of the General Assembly.

John Stewart,Keeper of Rolls.