SPEECHES IN THE FIRST CONGRESS—FIRST SESSION.1

APRIL 9. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

From what has been suggested by the gentlemen that have spoken on the subject
before us, I am led to apprehend we shall be under the necessity of travelling further
into an investigation of principles than what I supposed would be necessary, or had in
contemplation when I offered the propositions before you.

It was my view to restrain the first essay on this subject principally to the object of
revenue, and make this rather a temporary expedient than any thing permanent.2 I see,
however, that there are strong exceptions against deciding immediately on a part of
the plan, which I had the honor to bring forward, as well as against an application to
the resources mentioned in the list of articles just proposed by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania. (Mr. Hartley.)

I presume, that, however much we may be disposed to promote domestic
manufactures, we ought to pay some regard to the present policy of obtaining
revenue. It may be remarked also, that by fixing on a temporary expedient for this
purpose, we may gain more than we shall lose by suspending the consideration of the
other subject until we obtain fuller information of the state of our manufactures. We
have at this time the strongest motives for turning our attention to the point I have
mentioned; every gentleman sees that the prospect of our harvest from the Spring
importations is daily vanishing; and if the committee delay levying and collecting an
impost until a system of protecting duties shall be perfected, there will be no
importations of any consequence on which the law is to operate, because, by that
time, all the Spring vessels will have arrived. Therefore, from a pursuit of this policy,
we shall suffer a loss equal to the surplus which might be expected from a system of
higher duties.

I am sensible that there is great weight in the observation that fell from the honorable
gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. Tucker,) that it will be necessary, on the one
hand, to weigh and regard the sentiments of the gentlemen from the different parts of
the United States; but, on the other hand, we must limit our consideration on this
head, and, notwithstanding all the deference and respect we pay to those sentiments,
we must consider the general interest of the Union; for this is as much every
gentleman’s duty to consider as is the local or State interest—and any system of
impost that this committee may adopt must be founded on the principles of mutual
concession.

Gentlemen will be pleased to recollect, that those parts of the Union which contribute
more under one system than the other, are also those parts more thinly planted, and
consequently stand most in need of national protection; therefore they will have less
reason to complain of unequal burdens.
There is another consideration: the States that are most advanced in population, and
ripe for manufactures, ought to have their particular interests attended to in some
degree. While these States retained the power of making regulations of trade, they had
the power to protect and cherish such institutions; by adopting the present
Constitution they have thrown the exercise of this power into other hands; they must
have done this with an expectation that those interests would not be neglected here.

I am afraid, sir, on the one hand, that if we go fully into a discussion of the subject,
we shall consume more time than prudence would dictate to spare; on the other hand,
if we do not develope it, and see the principles on which we mutually act, we shall
subject ourselves to great difficulties. I beg leave, therefore, to state the grounds on
which my opinion, with respect to the matter under consideration, is founded, namely,
whether our present system should be a temporary or a permanent one? In the first
place, I own myself the friend to a very free system of commerce, and hold it as a
truth, that commercial shackles are generally unjust, oppressive, and impolitic; it is
also a truth, that if industry and labor are left to take their own course, they will
generally be directed to those objects which are the most productive, and this in a
more certain and direct manner than the wisdom of the most enlightened Legislature
could point out. Nor do I think that the national interest is more promoted by such
restrictions than that the interest of individuals would be promoted by legislative
interference directing the particular application of its industry. For example, we
should find no advantage in saying that every man should be obliged to furnish
himself, by his own labor, with those accommodations which depend on the mechanic
arts, instead of employing his neighbor, who could do it for him on better terms. It
would be of no advantage to the shoemaker to make his own clothes to save the
expense of the tailor’s bill, nor of the tailor to make his own shoes to save the expense
of procuring them from the shoemaker. It would be better policy to suffer each of
them to employ his talents in his own way. The case is the same between the exercise
of the arts and agriculture—between the city and the country—and between city and
town; each capable of making particular articles in abundance to supply the other:
thus all are benefited by exchange, and the less this exchange is cramped by
Government, the greater are the proportions of benefit to each. The same argument
holds good between nation and nation, and between parts of the same nation.

In my opinion it would be proper also for gentlemen to consider the means of
encouraging the great staple of America, I mean agriculture; which I think may justly
be styled the staple of the United States, from the spontaneous productions which
nature furnishes, and the manifest advantage it has over every other object of
emolument in this country. If we compare the cheapness of our land with that of other
nations, we see so decided an advantage in that cheapness, as to have full confidence
of being unrivalled. With respect to the object of manufactures, other countries may
and do rival us; but we may be said to have a monopoly in agriculture; the possession
of the soil, and the lowness of its price, give us as much a monopoly in this case as
any nation or other parts of the world have in the monopoly of any article whatever;
but with this advantage to us, that it cannot be shared nor injured by rivalship.

If my general principle is a good one, that commerce ought to be free, and labor and
industry left at large to find its proper object, the only thing which remains will be to
discover the exceptions that do not come within the rule I have laid down. I agree
with the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that there are exceptions important in
themselves, and which claim the particular attention of the committee. Although the
freedom of commerce would be advantageous to the world, yet, in some particulars,
one nation might suffer to benefit others, and this ought to be for the general good of
society.

If America was to leave her ports perfectly free, and make no discrimination between
vessels owned by her citizens and those owned by foreigners, while other nations
make this discrimination, it is obvious that such policy would go to exclude American
shipping altogether from foreign ports, and she would be materially affected in one of
her most important interests. To this we may add another consideration, that by
encouraging the means of transporting our productions with facility, we encourage the
raising them: and this object, I apprehend, is likely to be kept in view by the General
Government.

Duties laid on imported articles may have an effect which comes within the idea of
national prudence. It may happen that materials for manufactures may grow up
without any encouragement for this purpose; it has been the case in some of the
States, but in others regulations have been provided, and have succeeded in producing
some establishments, which ought not to be allowed to perish, from the alteration
which has taken place: it would be cruel to neglect them and divert their industry to
other channels; for it is not possible for the hand of man to shift from one employment
to another without being injured by the change. There may be some manufactures,
which, being once formed, can advance towards perfection without any adventitious
aid, while others, for want of the fostering hand of Government, will be unable to go
on at all. Legislative attention will therefore be necessary to collect the proper objects
for this purpose, and this will form another exception to my general principle.

I observe that a sumptuary prohibition is within the view of some of the proposed
articles, and forms another exception. I acknowledge that I do not, in general, think
any great national advantage arises from restrictions passed on this head, because, as
long as a distinction in point of value subsists, sumptuary duties, in some form or
other, will prevail and take effect.

Another exception is embargoes in time of war. These may necessarily occur and
shackle the freedom of commerce; but the reasons for this are so obvious, that it
renders any remark unnecessary.

The next exception that occurs, is one on which great stress is laid by some well
informed men, and this with great plausibility. That each nation should have within
itself the means of defence, independent of foreign supplies: that in whatever relates
to the operations of war, no State ought to depend upon a precarious supply from any
part of the world. There may be some truth in this remark, and therefore it is proper
for legislative attention. I am, though, well persuaded that the reasoning on this
subject has been carried too far. The difficulties we experienced a few years ago of
obtaining military supplies, ought not furnish too much in favor of an establishment
which would be difficult and expensive; because our national character is now
established and recognised throughout the world, and the laws of war favor national
exertion more than intestine commotion, so that there is good reason to believe that,
when it becomes necessary, we may obtain supplies from abroad as readily as any
other nation whatsoever. I have mentioned this because I think I see something among
the enumerated articles that seems to favor such a policy.

The impost laid on trade for the purpose of obtaining revenue may likewise be
considered as an exception; so far, therefore, as revenue can be more conveniently
and certainly raised by this than any other method, without injury to the community,
and its operation will be in due proportion to the consumption, which consumption is
generally proportioned to the circumstances of individuals, I think sound policy
dictates to use this means; but it will be necessary to confine our attention at this time
peculiarly to the object of revenue, because the other subject involves some intricate
questions, to unravel which we perhaps are not prepared. I have no objection to the
committee’s accepting the propositions offered by the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
because so far as we can enumerate the proper objects, and apply specific duties to
them, we conform to the practice prevalent in many of the States, and adopt the most
laudable method of collecting revenue, at least preferable to laying a general tax.
Whether, therefore, we consult ease and convenience in collection, or pursuing habits
already adopted and approved, specific duties, as far as the articles can be properly
enumerated, is the most eligible mode of obtaining the end in contemplation. Upon
the whole, as I think some of the propositions may be productive of revenue, and
some may protect our domestic manufactures, though the latter subject ought not to be
too confusedly blended with the former, I hope the committee will receive them, and
let them lie over, in order that we may have time to consider how far they are
consistent with justice and policy.1

APRIL 21. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

Some gentlemen have seemed to call in question the policy of discriminating between
nations in commercial alliance with the United States, and those with whom no
treaties exist. For my own part, I am well satisfied that there are good and substantial
reasons for making it. In the first place, it may not be unworthy of consideration, that
the public sentiments of America will be favorable to such discrimination. I am sure,
with respect to that part from which I come, it will not be a pleasing ingredient in your
laws, if they find foreigners of every nation put on a footing with those in alliance
with us. There is another reason, which, perhaps, is more applicable to some parts of
the Union than others; one of the few nations with which America has formed
commercial connexions has relaxed considerably in that rigid policy it before
pursued—not so far, to be sure, as America could wish, with respect to opening her
ports to our trade; but she has permitted our ready built ships a sale, and entitles them
to the same advantage, when owned by her own citizens, as if they had been built in
France, subjecting the sale to a duty of five per cent. The British market receives
none; the disabilities of our ships to trade with their colonies continue, even if they are
purchased by the subjects of Great Britain; of consequence, they cannot be sold
without a considerable loss. Nay, so cautious are they to prevent the advantages we
naturally possess, that they will not suffer a British ship to be repaired in America,
beyond a certain proportion of her value; they even will not permit our vessels to be
repaired in their ports.

Another consideration has some weight with me in deciding the question of
discrimination. The policy of our ally, from the views of the minister employed, has
frequently been adverse to the interest of this country. The person who has had the
charge of our affairs at that Court has long been soliciting a relaxation in our favor,
and although it cannot be declared that he has succeeded, yet there is reason to believe
he has made some impressions, which our conduct ought to avoid effacing; they are
such as merit national attention, and might justify a discrimination at this time,
although it may be proper to hold ourselves at liberty to pursue that policy which a
change may make necessary. There are also other considerations which ought to be
taken into view. From artificial or adventitious causes, the commerce between
America and Great Britain exceeds what may be considered its natural boundary. I
find from an examination of the accounts of tonnage for the three large States of
Massachusetts, Virginia, and South Carolina, that the tonnage of nations in alliance
with us holds no proportion with that of Great Britain, or of the United States. This is
a proof that a very small direct commerce takes place between those countries and
this; that there is less of direct intercourse than there would naturally be if those
extraneous and adventitious causes did not prevent it; such as the long possession of
our trade, their commercial regulations calculated to retain it, their similarity of
language and manners, their conformity of laws and other circumstances—all these
concurring have made their commerce with us more extensive than their natural
situation would require it to be. I would wish, therefore, to give such political
advantages to those nations, as might enable them to gain their proportion of our
direct trade from the nation who has acquired more than it is naturally her due. From
this view of the subject, I am led to believe it would be good policy to make the
proposed discrimination between them. Is it not also of some importance, that we
should enable nations in treaty with us to draw some advantage from our alliance, and
thereby impress those Powers that have hitherto neglected to treat with us, with the
idea that advantages are to be gained by a reciprocity of friendship? If we give every
thing equally to those who have or have not formed treaties, surely we do not furnish
to them any motive for courting our connexion.

It has been objected, that the price of our produce at foreign markets would not bear
this additional burden, and that the freight must be paid by the planters. It will be
unnecessary, after what was said by the gentleman from Pennsylvania, (Mr.
Fitzsimons,) to take up the time of the committee in observing that foreigners must
receive our tobacco, rice, &c., in American shipping, if they cannot be otherwise got.
There may be a discrimination made in other respects besides in tonnage, so that a
very high impost on this article need not be insisted upon. But will any gentleman say,
British vessels ought to enjoy in American ports greater advantages than are enjoyed
by Americans in British ports? Yet were the duties laid equal in both cases, the British
merchant would have a very great superiority. In the first place, some of the most
valuable ports which she possesses, and most conducive to our interest, are absolutely
closed, while every port in the United States is open to her without restriction or
limitation. Again, even in those which it is permitted America to enter her vessels, she
must bring nothing but the produce of her own soil, whilst the British ship makes
circuitous voyages, and brings with her the produce of every quarter of the globe.
These are material advantages; and take the whole of these observations together, I
think they furnish substantial reasons for making the proposed discrimination.

APRIL 21. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

I am a friend to free commerce, and, at the same time, a friend to such regulations as
are calculated to promote our own interest, and this on national principles. The great
principle of interest is a leading one with me, and yet my combination of ideas on this
head leads me to a very different conclusion from that made by the gentleman from
New York, (Mr. Lawrence.) I wish we were under less necessity than I find we are to
shackle our commerce with duties, restrictions, and preferences; but there are cases in
which it is impossible to avoid following the example of other nations in the great
diversity of our trade. Some reasons for this were mentioned on a former occasion;
they have been frequently illustrated in the progress of this business, and the decision
of the committee has proved them to be necessary.

I beg leave to remark, in answer to a train of ideas which the gentleman last up has
brought into view, that although interest will, in general, operate effectually to
produce political good, yet there are causes in which certain factitious circumstances
may divert it from its natural channel, or throw or retain it in an artificial one. Have
we not been exercised on this topic for a long time past? Or why has it been necessary
to give encouragement to particular species of industry, but to turn the stream in favor
of an interest that would not otherwise succeed? But laying aside the illustration of
these causes, so well known to all nations, where cities, companies, or opulent
individuals engross the business from others, by having had an uninterrupted
possession of it, or by the extent of their capitals being able to destroy a competition,
let us proceed to examine what ought to be our conduct on this principle, upon the
present occasion. Suppose two commercial cities, one possessed of enormous capitals
and long habits of business, whilst the other is possessed of superior natural
advantages, but without that course of business and chain of connexions which the
other has: is it possible, in the nature of things, that the latter city should carry on a
successful competition with the former? Thus it is with nations; and when we
consider the vast quantities of our produce sent to the different parts of Europe, and
the great importations from the same places; that almost all of this commerce is
transacted through the medium of British ships and British merchants, I cannot help
conceiving that, from the force of habit and other conspiring causes, that nation is in
possession of a much greater proportion of our trade than she is naturally entitled to.
Trade, then, being restrained to an artificial channel, is not so advantageous to
America as a direct intercourse would be; it becomes therefore the duty of those to
whose care the public interest and welfare are committed, to turn the tide to a more
favorable direction.

In the trade of South Carolina is employed annually about 56,977 tons of shipping.
The proportion of French and Dutch is about 2,100 tons, while that of Great Britain is
about 19,000. In Massachusetts the quantity is about 85,551 tons; it is stated, that
there are belonging to the State, 76,857, the remainder is foreign, and mostly British.
In Virginia we have 56,272 tons; 26,903 British, and only 2,664 of the French and
Dutch. I cannot, from this view of the subject, be persuaded to believe that every part
of our trade flows in those channels which would be most natural and profitable to us,
or those which reason would dictate to us, if we were unincumbered of old habits and
other accidental circumstances that hurry us along.

It has been asked by the gentleman from New York (Mr. Lawrence) what evidence
we had that the public sentiments of America were in favor of discrimination?
Perhaps it would be improper on this occasion to adduce any other proof of the fact
than from the transactions of public bodies; and here, I think, is abundant proof to be
found. The State of Virginia, if I am not mistaken, lays a double duty on tonnage;
French and Dutch vessels pay half a dollar per ton, while the vessels of Great Britain
are subjected to one dollar. There are other distinctions in our revenue laws
manifesting the same principle; some of them establish a preference to French wines
and brandy. In Maryland, a similar policy has prevailed. I believe the difference there
is about one-third in favor of our allies, (if I err, the gentlemen from that State can set
me right;) in Pennsylvania, there is a discrimination of about a fourth. I do not
certainly recollect, but I believe the like policy exists in other States; but I have not
had an opportunity of searching their laws on this point, but what I have enumerated
are facts affording substantial proof that the public sentiment does favor the
discrimination.

MAY 9. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

The right understanding of this subject is of great importance. The discussion has
been drawn out to a very considerable length on former occasions. The chain of ideas
on which the subject is suspended, is not very long, nor consists of many links. The
present Constitution was framed to supply the defects of the one that has preceded it.
The great and material defects of it are well known to have arisen from its inability to
provide for the demands of justice and security of the Union. To supply those defects,
we are bound to fulfil the public engagements; expectation is anxiously waiting the
result of our deliberations; it cannot be satisfied without a sufficient revenue to
accomplish its purposes. We cannot obtain the money any other way but by taxation.
Among the various objects of this nature, an impost on merchandise imported is
preferable to all others, and among the long list of articles included in the bill, there is
not one more proper for the purpose than the article under consideration. The public
sentiment has strongly pointed it out as an object of revenue. I conceive, therefore,
that it will be our duty to draw from this source all the money that it is capable of
yielding. I am sure that it will not exceed our wants, nor extend to the injury of our
commerce. How far the powers of Government are capable of going on this occasion,
is matter of opinion; we have had no direct experiment of what can be done under the
energy and popularity of the new system; we must recur to other sources for
information, and then, unless the circumstances are alike, the comparison may not be
true. We have been referred to the experience of other nations; if that is to guide us on
this subject, I am sure we shall find precedents for going much further than is now
proposed. If I do not mistake the calculations that I have seen of duties on
importation, they amount to more on an average than fifteen per cent.; the duty on
ardent spirits in all nations exceeds what is in contemplation to be laid in the United
States. I am sensible that the means which are used by those nations to ensure the
collection, would be odious and improper in this country; but I believe the means
which this country is capable of using, without exciting complaint or incurring too
much expense, would be as adequate to secure a duty of fifteen per cent. as the
powers of any other nation could be to obtain ninety or one hundred per cent. If we
consult the experience of the United States, it does not admonish us that we are
proceeding too far; there are duties now under collection, in some States, that amount
nearly to the same as those we have in contemplation. A duty collected under the
feeble operation of the State Governments, cannot be supposed beyond our powers,
when those duties have been collected by them, with feeble powers, but under a
competition, not to say opposition, of the neighboring States. I am led, from a
knowledge of these circumstances, to believe that when we have established some
general rule, and have the co-operation of all the members of the Union, we shall be
able to do what is proposed by this bill, better than any one State could execute it with
its separate strength. If we consult the opinion of the merchants, we shall not find
them a very sure guide. Merchants do not pretend to infallibility; but if they did, they
have given a proof to the contrary, by their difference of opinion on this subject.
Gentlemen of that profession, both within these walls and out of doors, have been as
much divided on this point as any other description of men. I believe them to be the
best informed as to the probable effects of an impost system, but they are not exempt
from the infirmities of human nature. We know there is an essential difference
between the interest of merchants and the interest of commerce; we know there may
be distinctions also between the interest of commerce and of revenue; and that in
some cases we must sacrifice the one to the other. I am not sure that we are not under
the necessity of doing both in the business before us. It is barely matter of opinion
what revenue the General Government will be able to draw from the system now
proposed. This being the case, I have endeavored to make up mine, from the best
materials in my power. I pay great respect to the opinions of mercantile gentlemen,
and am willing to concede much to them, so far as their opinions are regulated by
experience; but if I am to be guided by this information, it will not lead me to agree to
the reduction of the duties in the manner contended for. It is said, that if we reduce at
all, we must go through the whole. Now I doubt whether the duty on the article of rum
exceeds that proportion which pervades the long list before us. It does not amount to
more than thirty per cent., while some other articles stand at forty; some articles again
that are not enumerated, but which fall within the general mass at five per cent., are
more likely to be introduced clandestinely than this article, if it stood at fifty per cent.
I am sure, if we reduce the whole system in the manner now proposed, all the duty we
shall be able to collect will be very incompetent to what the public necessities
demand. We must turn our eyes, then, to some other source that will fill up the
deficiency. There are but two objects to which, in this dilemma, we can have
recourse—direct taxation and excises. Direct taxation is not contemplated by any
gentleman on this floor, nor are our constituents prepared for such a system of
revenue; they expect it will not be applied to, until it is found that sufficient funds
cannot be obtained in any other way. Excises would give particular disgust in some
States, therefore gentlemen will not make up the deficiency from that quarter. I think,
upon the whole, it is better to try what will be produced by a plan which is favored by
the public sentiment. This will give a support to our laws equal to the greatest energy
of a strong execution. The citizens of America know that their individual interest is
connected with the public. We shall then have the strong motive of interest acting in
favor of the Government in a peculiar manner. But I am not inclined to trust too much
to this security. I would take in the aid of the best regulations in our power to provide;
these, acting in concert, would give a moral certainty to the faithful collection of the
revenue. But if gentlemen notwithstanding will persist in contending against such a
system, and cannot offer us a substitute, we must fail of the primary object for which
the Government was created. If upon experience we find that the duties cannot be
safely collected, it may be proper to reduce them; but if we set them too low in the
first instance, and they do not yield a sufficiency to answer the just demands of the
public creditors and the expenses of Government, the public reputation must suffer.

I need not inform gentlemen we are surrounded with difficulties; they are seen on
every side; but they appear as few and as surmountable on the side of the bill, as they
do in any other part of the prospect. If we give way on this article, we are to do so
upon all others. It is not for any reason peculiar to Jamaica spirits that the reduction is
moved for; hence, I conceive, if gentlemen meet with success in opposing this duty,
we shall be reduced to a system inadequate to our wants, and thereby defeat the chief
object of our appointment.1

May 11. Titles.

I may be well disposed to concur in opinion with gentlemen that we ought not to
recede from our former vote on this subject, yet at the same time I may wish to
proceed with due respect to the Senate, and give dignity and weight to our own
opinion, so far as it contradicts theirs, by the deliberate and decent manner in which
we decide. For my part, Mr. Speaker, I do not conceive titles to be so pregnant with
danger as some gentlemen apprehend. I believe a President of the United States,
clothed with all the powers given in the Constitution, would not be a dangerous
person to the liberties of America, if you were to load him with all the titles of Europe
or Asia. We have seen superb and august titles given, without conferring power and
influence, or without even obtaining respect. One of the most impotent sovereigns in
Europe has assumed a title as high as human invention can devise; for example, what
words can imply a greater magnitude of power and strength than that of High
Mightiness? This title seems to border almost upon impiety; it is assuming the pre-
eminence and omnipotence of the Deity; yet this title, and many others cast in the
same mould, have obtained a long time in Europe, but have they conferred power?
Does experience sanction such an opinion? Look at the Republic I have alluded to,
and say if their present state warrants the idea?

I am not afraid of titles, because I fear the danger of any power they could confer, but
I am against them because they are not very reconcilable with the nature of our
Government or the genius of the people. Even if they were proper in themselves, they
are not so at this juncture of time. But my strongest objection is founded in principle;
instead of increasing, they diminish the true dignity and importance of a Republic,
and would in particular, on this occasion, diminish the true dignity of the first
magistrate himself. If we give titles, we must either borrow or invent them. If we have
recourse to the fertile fields of luxuriant fancy, and deck out an airy being of our own
creation, it is a great chance but its fantastic properties would render the empty
phantom ridiculous and absurd. If we borrow, the servile imitation will be odious, not
to say ridiculous also; we must copy from the pompous sovereigns of the East, or
follow the inferior potentates of Europe; in either case, the splendid tinsel or grogeous
robe would disgrace the manly shoulders of our chief. The more truly honorable shall
we be, by showing a total neglect and disregard to things of this nature; the more
simple, the more Republican we are in our manners, the more rational dignity we shall
acquire; therefore, I am better pleased with the report adopted by the House, than I
should have been with any other whatsoever.

The Senate, no doubt, entertain different sentiments on this subject. I would wish,
therefore, to treat their opinion with respect and attention. I would desire to justify the
reasonable and republican decision of this House to the other branch of Congress, in
order to prevent a misunderstanding. But that the motion of my worthy colleague (Mr.
Parker) has possession of the House, I would move a more temperate proposition, and
I think it deserves some pains to bring about that good will and urbanity, which, for
the despatch of public business, ought to be kept up between the two Houses. I do not
think it would be a sacrifice of dignity to appoint a Committee of Conference, but
imagine it would tend to cement that harmony which has hitherto been preserved
between the Senate and this House; therefore, while I concur with the gentlemen who
express, in such decided terms, their disapprobation of bestowing titles, I concur also
with those who are for the appointment of a Committee of Conference, not
apprehending they will depart from the principles adopted and acted upon by the
House.

MAY 12. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

Mr. Madison said his mind was incapable of discovering any plan that would answer
the purpose the committee have in view, and not produce greater evils than the one
under consideration. He thought an excise very objectionable, but as no actual
proposition for entering into such a system was before the committee, he forebore to
say any thing further about it. He admitted an excise would obviate in part some of
the difficulties; but he did not think the answer given to his argument altogether
satisfactory; yet there was another argument he urged on a former occasion remaining
unanswered—it was, that, at this moment, the fisheries, distilleries, and all their
connexions, were laboring under heavier duties than what is now proposed; true, the
duty is collected in a different mode, but it affects the consumer in the same manner.
The gentlemen have said, to be sure, that the duty is evaded; but if half is collected, it
will amount to more than six cents per gallon.

It is said that a tax on molasses will be unpopular, but not more so than a tax on salt.
Can gentlemen state more serious apprehensions in the former than the latter case? yet
the committee did not forego a productive fund, because the article was a necessary of
life, and in general consumption. If there is the disposition that is represented for
people to complain of the oppression of Government, have not the citizens of the
Southern States more just ground of complaint than others? The system can only be
acceptable to them, because it is essentially necessary to be adopted for the public
good.
Gentlemen argue, that a tax on molasses is unpopular, and prove it by experience
under the British Government. If this is to be adduced as a proof of the popularity of
the measure, what are we to say with respect to a tax on tea? Gentlemen remembered,
no doubt, how odious this kind of tax was thought to be throughout America; yet the
House had, without hesitation, laid a considerable duty upon it. He did not imagine
that a duty on either of those articles, was in itself objectionable; it was the principle
upon which the tax was laid that made them unpopular under the British Government.

It is said that this tax is unjust; now, he had not a single idea of justice, that did not
contradict the position. If it be considered as it relates to rum, he was certain the
consumers of foreign rum paid a larger proportion of revenue into the Treasury than
the consumers of country rum; they paid more than equal distributive justice required;
if it was considered as it respected molasses, there would appear no injustice.
Molasses was consumed in other States; but if it was not, sugar was used in its stead,
and subjected to a duty full as high as that on molasses. But dismissing both these
considerations, and even admitting the whole weight to fall on the Northern States, it
would not be disproportioned, because, in the long list of enumerated articles subject
to a high duty, they imported few or none; indeed, the articles were pretty generally
taxed for the benefit of the manufacturing part of the northern community; see loaf
sugar, candles, cheese, soap, &c. He hoped gentlemen would not infer from this
observation, that he thought the encouragement held out by the bill to manufactures
improper; far from it; he was glad to see their growing consequence, and was
disposed to give them every aid in his power. From this view of the subject, he was
inclined to adhere to the bill, and not make any reduction.

MAY 14. DUTIES ON IMPORTS.

When he offered this amendment to the bill, he thought its propriety was so obvious
and striking, that it would meet no opposition. To pass a bill,1 not limited in duration,
which was to draw revenue from the pockets of the people, appeared to be dangerous
in the administration of any Government; he hoped, therefore, the House would not be
less cautious in this particular than other nations are, who profess to act upon sound
principles. He imagined it might be considered by their constituents as incompatible
with the spirit of the Constitution, and dangerous to republican principles, to pass
such a law unlimited in its duration.

He hoped it would not be understood by gentlemen who opposed his motion, that he
supposed them to be actuated with a desire to do injury to either of those principles;
he believed them to be moved only by an ardent desire to promote the general
welfare, by the re-establishment of public credit. He would heartily join his labors
with theirs, to effect this object, but wished to do it in a way, that while they served
their country, they might secure the liberties of the people, and do honor to
themselves. Besides the restoration of public credit, he thought the act had in view the
encouragement of a particular description of people, which might lead them into
enterprises of a peculiar nature, for the protection of which the public faith seemed to
be pledged. But would gentlemen infer from hence, that no alteration ought to take
place if the manufactures were well established? The subject appeared to him in a
twofold point of view; first, to provide for the exigencies of Government, and second,
for the establishment of public credit; but he thought both these objects could be
obtained without making the bill perpetual. If the Government showed a proper
attention to the punctual performance of its engagements, it would obtain the latter;
the other would be secured by making provision as the occasion demanded. If the bill
was to be made perpetual, it would be continued after the purpose for which it was
adopted had ceased; the error would in this case be irremediable; whereas, if its
limitation was determined, it would always be in the power of the Government to
make it commensurate with what the public debts and contingencies required.

The Constitution, as had already been observed, places the power in the House of
originating money bills. The principal reason why the Constitution had made this
distinction was, because they were chosen by the people, and supposed to be best
acquainted with their interests and ability. In order to make them more particularly
acquainted with these objects, the democratic branch of the Legislature consisted of a
greater number, and were chosen for a shorter period, so that they might revert more
frequently to the mass of the people. Now, if a revenue law was made perpetual,
however unequal its operation might be, it would be out of the power of this House to
effect an alteration; for if the President chose to object to the measure, it would
require two-thirds of both Houses to carry it. Even if the House of Representatives
were unanimous in their opinion that the law ought to be repealed, they would not be
able to carry it, unless a great majority appeared in the Senate also.

He observed, that an honorable gentleman had thought that no appropriation of the
public money could be made for a longer term than two years. This was true, as it
related to the support of armies; but the question here did not appear to be respecting
an appropriation. It was the revenue itself, which, without any appropriation, might
continue flowing into the public treasury independent of the will of the people, and
might thereby become a convenience in the hands of some other department of the
Government, for the purpose of oppression. Experience might also forcibly suggest
the necessity and importance of alterations in the law, yet, without this clause, it
might never be in the power of the House to make them.1

MAY 19. POWER OF REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.

Mr. Madison did not concur with the gentleman in his interpretation of the
Constitution.2 What, said he, would be the consequence of such construction? It
would in effect establish every officer of the Government on the firm tenure of good
behaviour; not the heads of Departments only, but all the inferior officers of those
Departments, would hold their offices during good behaviour, and that to be judged of
by one branch of the Legislature only on the impeachment of the other. If the
Constitution means this by its declarations to be the case, we must submit; but I
should lament it as a fatal error interwoven in the system, and one that would
ultimately prove its destruction. I think the inference would not arise from a fair
construction of the words of that instrument.

It is very possible that an officer who may not incur the displeasure of the President,
may be guilty of actions that ought to forfeit his place. The power of this House may
reach him by the means of an impeachment, and he may be removed even against the
will of the President; so that the declaration in the Constitution was intended as a
supplemental security for the good behaviour of the public officers. It is possible the
case I have stated may happen. Indeed, it may, perhaps, on some occasion, be found
necessary to impeach the President himself; surely, therefore, it may happen to a
subordinate officer, whose bad actions may be connived at or overlooked by the
President. Hence the people have an additional security in this Constitutional
provision.

I think it absolutely necessary that the President should have the power of removing
from office; it will make him, in a peculiar manner, responsible for their conduct, and
subject him to impeachment himself, if he suffers them to perpetrate with impunity
high crimes or misdemeanors against the United States, or neglects to superintend
their conduct, so as to check their excesses. On the Constitutionality of the declaration
I have no manner of doubt.

I look upon every Constitutional question, whatever its nature may be, as of great
importance. I look upon the present to be doubly so, because its nature is of the
highest moment to the well-being of the Government. I have listened with attention to
the objections which have been stated, and to the replies that have been made, and I
think the investigation of the meaning of the Constitution has supported the doctrine I
brought forward. If you consult the expediency, it will be greatly against the doctrine
advanced by gentlemen on the other side of the question. See to what inconsistency
gentlemen drive themselves by their construction of the Constitution. The gentleman
from South Carolina, (Mr. Smith,) in order to bring to conviction and punishment an
offender in any of the principal offices, must have recourse to a breach of the common
law, and yet he may there be found guilty, and maintain his office, because he is fixed
by the Constitution. It has been said, we may guard against the inconveniency of that
construction, by limiting the duration of the office to a term of years; but, during that
term, there is no way of getting rid of a bad officer but by impeachment. During the
time this is depending, the person may continue to commit those crimes for which he
is impeached, because if his construction of the Constitution is right, the President can
have no more power to suspend than he has to remove.

What fell from one of my colleagues (Mr. Bland) appears to have more weight than
any thing hitherto suggested. The Constitution, at the first view, may seem to favor
his opinion; but that must be the case only at the first view; for, if we examine it, we
shall find his construction incompatible with the spirit and principles contained in that
instrument.

It is said, that it comports with the nature of things, that those who appoint should
have the power of removal; but I cannot conceive that this sentiment is warranted by
the Constitution; I believe it would be found very inconvenient in practice. It is one of
the most prominent features of the Constitution, a principle that pervades the whole
system, that there should be the highest possible degree of responsibility in all the
Executive officers thereof; any thing, therefore, which tends to lessen this
responsibility, is contrary to its spirit and intention, and, unless it is saddled upon us
expressly by the letter of that work, I shall oppose the admission of it into any act of
the Legislature. Now, if the heads of the Executive departments are subjected to
removal by the President alone, we have in him security for the good behaviour of the
officer. If he does not conform to the judgment of the President in doing the executive
duties of his office, he can be displaced. This makes him responsible to the great
Executive power, and makes the President responsible to the public for the conduct of
the person he has nominated and appointed to aid him in the administration of his
department. But if the President shall join in a collusion with this officer, and continue
a bad man in office, the case of impeachment will reach the culprit, and drag him
forth to punishment. But if you take the other construction, and say he shall not be
displaced but by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, the President is no
longer answerable for the conduct of the officer; all will depend upon the Senate. You
here destroy a real responsibility without obtaining even the shadow; for no
gentleman will pretend to say the responsibility of the Senate can be of such a nature
as to afford substantial security. But why, it may be asked, was the Senate joined with
the President in appointing to office, if they have no responsibility? I answer, merely
for the sake of advising, being supposed, from their nature, better acquainted with the
character of the candidates than an individual; yet even here the President is held to
the responsibility—he nominates, and, with their consent, appoints. No person can be
forced upon him as an assistant by any other branch of the Government.

There is another objection to this construction, which I consider of some weight, and
shall therefore mention to the committee. Perhaps there was no argument urged with
more success, or more plausibly grounded against the Constitution, under which we
are now deliberating, than that founded on the mingling of the Executive and
Legislative branches of the Government in one body. It has been objected, that the
Senate have too much of the Executive power even, by having a control over the
President in the appointment to office. Now, shall we extend this connexion between
the Legislative and Executive departments, which will strengthen the objection, and
diminish the responsibility we have in the head of the Executive? I cannot but believe,
if gentlemen weigh well these considerations, they will think it safe and expedient to
adopt the clause.

MAY 22. CITIZENSHIP OF THE UNITED STATES.

I think the merit of the question is now to be decided, whether the gentleman is
eligible to a seat in this House or not; but it will depend on the decision of a previous
question, whether he has been seven years a citizen of the United States or not.

From an attention to the facts which have been adduced, and from a consideration of
the principles established by the Revolution, the conclusion I have drawn is, that Mr.
Smith was, on the declaration of independence, a citizen of the United States; and
unless it appears that he has forfeited his right, by some neglect or overt act, he had
continued a citizen until the day of his election to a seat in this House. I take it to be a
clear point, that we are to be guided, in our decision, by the laws and constitution of
South Carolina, so far as they can guide us; and where the laws do not expressly guide
us, we must be guided by principles of a general nature, so far as they are applicable
to the present case.
It were to be wished, that we had some law adduced, more precisely defining the
qualities of a citizen or an alien; particular laws of this kind have obtained in some of
the States; if such a law existed in South Carolina, it might have prevented this
question from ever coming before us; but since this has not been the case, let us settle
some general principle before we proceed to the presumptive proof arising from
public measures under the law, which tend to give support to the inference drawn
from such principles.

It is an established maxim that birth is a criterion of allegiance. Birth, however,
derives its force sometimes from place, and sometimes from parentage, but, in
general, place is the most certain criterion; it is what applies in the United States; it
will, therefore, be unnecessary to investigate any other. Mr. Smith founds his claim
upon his birthright; his ancestors were among the first settlers of that colony.

It is well known to many gentlemen on this floor, as well as to the public, that the
petitioner1 is a man of talents, one who would not lightly hazard his reputation in
support of visionary principles: yet I cannot but think he has erred in one of the
principles upon which he grounds his charge. He supposes, when this country
separated from Great Britain, the tie of allegiance subsisted between the inhabitants of
America and the King of that nation, unless, by some adventitious circumstance, the
allegiance was transferred to one of the United States. I think there is a distinction
which will invalidate his doctrine in this particular, a distinction between that primary
allegiance which we owe to that particular society of which we are members, and the
secondary allegiance we owe to the Sovereign established by that society. This
distinction will be illustrated by the doctrine established by the laws of Great Britain,
which were the laws of this country before the Revolution. The Sovereign cannot
make a citizen by any act of his own; he can confer denizenship: but this does not
make a man either a citizen or subject. In order to make a citizen or subject, it is
established, that allegiance shall first be due to the whole nation; it is necessary that a
national act should pass to admit an individual member. In order to become a member
of the British empire, where birth has not endowed the person with that privilege, he
must be naturalized by an act of Parliament.

What was the situation of the people of America, when the dissolution of their
allegiance took place by the declaration of independence? I conceive that every
person who owed this primary allegiance to the particular community in which he was
born, retained his right of birth, as a member of a new community; that he was
consequently absolved from the secondary allegiance he had owed to the British
Sovereign. If he were not a minor, he became bound, by his own act, as a member of
the society who separated with him from a submission to a foreign country. If he were
a minor, his consent was involved in the decision of that society to which he belonged
by the ties of nature. What was the allegiance, as a citizen of South Carolina, he owed
to the King of Great Britain? He owed his allegiance to him as a King of that society
to which, as a society, he owed his primary allegiance. When that society separated
from Great Britain, he was bound by that act, and his allegiance transferred to that
society, or the Sovereign which that society should set up; because it was through his
membership of the society of South Carolina that he owed allegiance to Great Britain.
This reasoning will hold good, unless it is supposed that the separation which took
place between these States and Great Britain, not only dissolved the union between
those countries, but dissolved the union among the citizens themselves: that the
original compact, which made them altogether one society, being dissolved, they
could not fall into pieces, each part making an independent society; but must
individually revert into a state of nature; but I do not conceive that this was, of
necessity, to be the case; I believe such a revolution did not absolutely take place. But
in supposing that this was the case, lies the error of the memorialist. I conceive the
colonies remained as a political society, detached from their former connexion with
another society, without dissolving into a state of nature, but capable of substituting a
new form of Government in the place of the old one, which they had, for special
considerations, abolished. Suppose the State of South Carolina should think proper to
revise her constitution, abolish that which now exists, and establish another form of
Government: surely this would not dissolve the social compact. It would not throw
them back into a state of nature. It would not dissolve the union between the
individual members of that society. It would leave them in perfect society, changing
only the mode of action, which they are always at liberty to arrange. Mr. Smith being
then, at the declaration of independence, a minor, but being a member of that
particular society, he became, in my opinion, bound by the decision of the society,
with respect to the question of independence and change of Government; and if
afterwards he had taken part with the enemies of his country, he would have been
guilty of treason against that Government to which he owed allegiance, and would
have been liable to be prosecuted as a traitor.

If it be said, that very inconvenient circumstances would result from this principle,
that it would constitute all those persons who are natives of America, but who took
part against the revolution, citizens of the United States, I would beg leave to observe,
that we are deciding a question of right, unmixed with the question of expediency, and
must, therefore, pay a proper attention to this principle. But I think it can hardly be
expected by gentlemen that the principle will operate dangerously. Those who left
their country, to take part with Britain, were of two descriptions—minors, or persons
of mature age. With respect to the latter, nothing can be inferred with respect to them
from the decision of the present case; because they had the power of making an option
between the contending parties; whether this was a matter of right or not is a question
which need not be agitated in order to settle the case before us. Then, with respect to
those natives who were minors at the Revolution, and whose case is analogous to Mr
Smith’s, if we are bound by the precedent of such a decision as we are about to make,
and it is declared that they owe a primary allegiance to this country, I still think we
are not likely to be inundated with such characters; so far as any of them took part
against us, they violated their allegiance, and opposed our laws; so, then, there can be
only a few characters, such as were minors at the Revolution, and who have never
violated their allegiance by a foreign connexion, who can be affected by the decision
of the present question. The number, I admit, is large who might be acknowledged
citizens on my principles, but there will very few be found daring enough to face the
laws of the country they have violated, and against which they have committed high
treason.
So far as we can judge by the laws of Carolina, and the practice and decision of that
State, the principles I have adduced are supported; and I must own, that I feel myself
at liberty to decide, that Mr. Smith was a citizen at the declaration of independence, a
citizen at the time of his election and, consequently, entitled to a seat in this
Legislature.1

JUNE 8. AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION.

I am sorry to be accessary to the loss of a single moment of time by the House. If I
had been indulged in my motion, and we had gone into a Committee of the Whole, I
think we might have rose and resumed the consideration of other business before this
time; that is, so far as it depended upon what I proposed to bring forward. As that
mode seems not to give satisfaction, I will withdraw the motion, and move you, sir,
that a select committee be appointed to consider and report such amendments as are
proper for Congress to propose to the Legislatures of the several States, conformably
to the fifth article of the Constitution.

I will state my reasons why I think it proper to propose amendments, and state the
amendments themselves, so far as I think they ought to be proposed. If I thought I
could fulfil the duty which I owe to myself and my constituents, to let the subject pass
over in silence, I most certainly should not trespass upon the indulgence of this
House. But I cannot do this, and am therefore compelled to beg a patient hearing to
what I have to lay before you. And I do most sincerely believe, that if Congress will
devote but one day to this subject, so far as to satisfy the public that we do not
disregard their wishes, it will have a salutary influence on the public councils, and
prepare the way for a favorable reception of our future measures. It appears to me that
this House is bound by every motive of prudence, not to let the first session pass over
without proposing to the State Legislatures, some things to be incorporated into the
Constitution, that will render it as acceptable to the whole people of the United States,
as it has been found acceptable to a majority of them. I wish, among other reasons
why something should be done, that those who had been friendly to the adoption of
this Constitution may have the opportunity of proving to those who were opposed to it
that they were as sincerely devoted to liberty and a Republican Government, as those
who charged them with wishing the adoption of this Constitution in order to lay the
foundation of an aristocracy or despotism. It will be a desirable thing to extinguish
from the bosom of every member of the community, any apprehensions that there are
those among his countrymen who wish to deprive them of the liberty for which they
valiantly fought and honorably bled. And if there are amendments desired of such a
nature as will not injure the Constitution, and they can be ingrafted so as to give
satisfaction to the doubting part of our fellow-citizens, the friends of the Federal
Government will evince that spirit of deference and concession for which they have
hitherto been distinguished.

It cannot be a secret to the gentlemen in this House, that, notwithstanding the
ratification of this system of Government by eleven of the thirteen United States, in
some cases unanimously, in others by large majorities; yet still there is a great number
of our constituents who are dissatisfied with it, among whom are many respectable for
their talents and patriotism, and respectable for the jealousy they have for their liberty,
which, though mistaken in its object is laudable in its motive. There is a great body of
the people falling under this description, who at present feel much inclined to join
their support to the cause of Federalism, if they were satisfied on this one point. We
ought not to disregard their inclination, but, on principles of amity and moderation,
conform to their wishes, and expressly declare the great rights of mankind secured
under this Constitution. The acquiescence which our fellow-citizens show under the
Government, calls upon us for a like return of moderation. But perhaps there is a
stronger motive than this for our going into a consideration of the subject. It is to
provide those securities for liberty which are required by a part of the community; I
allude in a particular manner to those two States that have not thought fit to throw
themselves into the bosom of the Confederacy. It is a desirable thing, on our part as
well as theirs, that a re-union should take place as soon as possible. I have no doubt, if
we proceed to take those steps which would be prudent and requisite at this juncture,
that in a short time we should see that disposition prevailing in those States which
have not come in, that we have seen prevailing in those States which have embraced
the Constitution.

But I will candidly acknowledge, that, over and above all these considerations, I do
conceive that the Constitution may be amended; that is to say, if all power is subject
to abuse, that then it is possible the abuse of the powers of the General Government
may be guarded against in a more secure manner than is now done, while no one
advantage arising from the exercise of that power shall be damaged or endangered by
it. We have in this way something to gain, and, if we proceed with caution, nothing to
lose. And in this case it is necessary to proceed with caution; for while we feel all
these inducements to go into a revisal of the Constitution, we must feel for the
Constitution itself, and make that revisal a moderate one. I should be unwilling to see
a door opened for a reconsideration of the whole structure the Government—for a re-
consideration of the principles and the substance of the powers given; because I
doubt, if such a door were opened, we should be very likely to stop at that point which
would be safe to the Government itself. But I do wish to see a door opened to
consider, so far as to incorporate those provisions for the security of rights, against
which I believe no serious objection has been made by any class of our constituents:
such as would be likely to meet with the concurrence of two-thirds of both Houses,
and the approbation of three-fourths of the State Legislatures. I will not propose a
single alteration which I do not wish to see take place, as intrinsically proper in itself,
or proper because it is wished for by a respectable number of my fellow-citizens; and
therefore I shall not propose a single alteration but is likely to meet the concurrence
required by the Constitution. There have been objections of various kinds made
against the Constitution. Some were levelled against its structure because the
President was without a council; because the Senate, which is a legislative body, had
judicial powers in trials on impeachments; and because the powers of that body were
compounded in other respects, in a manner that did not correspond with a particular
theory; because it grants more power than is supposed to be necessary for every good
purpose, and controls the ordinary powers of the State governments. I know some
respectable characters who opposed this Government on these grounds; but I believe
that the great mass of the people who opposed it, disliked it because it did not contain
effectual provisions against the encroachments on particular rights, and those
safeguards which they have been long accustomed to have interposed between them
and the magistrate who exercises the sovereign power; nor ought we to consider them
safe, while a great number of our fellow-citizens think these securities necessary.

It is a fortunate thing that the objection to the Government has been made on the
ground I stated; because it will be practicable, on that ground, to obviate the
objection, so far as to satisfy the public mind that their liberties will be perpetual, and
this without endangering any part of the Constitution, which is considered as essential
to the existence of the Government by those who promoted its adoption.

The amendments which have occurred to me, proper to be recommended by Congress
to the State Legislatures, are these:

First. That there be prefixed to the Constitution a declaration, that all power is
originally vested in, and consequently derived from, the people.

That Government is instituted and ought to be exercised for the benefit of the people;
which consists in the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the right of acquiring and
using property, and generally of pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

That the people have an indubitable, unalienable, and indefeasible right to reform or
change their Government, whenever it be found adverse or inadequate to the purposes
of its institution.

Secondly. That in article 1st, section 2, clause 3, these words be struck out, to wit:
“The number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but
each State shall have at least one Representative, and until such enumeration shall be
made;” and that in place thereof be inserted these words, to wit: “After the first actual
enumeration, there shall be one Representative for every thirty thousand, until the
number amounts to —, after which the proportion shall be so regulated by Congress,
that the number shall never be less than —, nor more than —, but each State shall,
after the first enumeration, have at least two Representatives; and prior thereto.”

Thirdly. That in article 1st, section 6, clause 1, there be added to the end of the first
sentence, these words, to wit: “But no law varying the compensation last ascertained
shall operate before the next ensuing election of Representatives.”

Fourthly. That in article 1st, section 9, between clauses 3 and 4, be inserted these
clauses, to wit: The civil rights of none shall be abridged on account of religious
belief or worship, nor shall any national religion be established, nor shall the full and
equal rights of conscience be in any manner, or on any pretext, infringed.

The people shall not be deprived or abridged of their right to speak, to write, or to
publish their sentiments; and the freedom of the press, as one of the great bulwarks of
liberty, shall be inviolable.

The people shall not be restrained from peaceably assembling and consulting for their
common good; nor from applying to the Legislature by petitions, or remonstrances,
for redress of their grievances.
The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed; a well armed and
well regulated militia being the best security of a free country: but no person
religiously scrupulous of bearing arms shall be compelled to render military service in
person.

No soldiers shall in time of peace be quartered in any house without the consent of the
owner; nor at any time, but in a manner warranted by law.

No person shall be subject, except in cases of impeachment, to more than one
punishment or one trial for the same offence; nor shall be compelled to be a witness
against himself; nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of
law; nor be obliged to relinquish his property, where it may be necessary for public
use, without a just compensation.

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and
unusual punishments inflicted.

The rights of the people to be secured in their persons, their houses, their papers, and
their other property, from all unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated
by warrants issued without probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, or not
particularly describing the places to be searched, or the persons or things to be seized.

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public
trial, to be informed of the cause and nature of the accusation, to be confronted with
his accusers, and the witnesses against him; to have a compulsory process for
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.

The exceptions here or elsewhere in the Constitution, made in favor of particular
rights, shall not be so construed as to diminish the just importance of other rights
retained by the people, or as to enlarge the powers delegated by the Constitution; but
either as actual limitations of such powers, or as inserted merely for greater caution.

Fifthly. That in article 1st, section 10, between clauses 1 and 2, be inserted this clause,
to wit:

No State shall violate the equal rights of conscience, or the freedom of the press, or
the trial by jury in criminal cases.

Sixthly. That, in article 3d, section 2, be annexed to the end of clause 2d, these words,
to wit:

But no appeal to such court shall be allowed where the value in controversy shall not
amount to — dollars: nor shall any fact triable by jury, according to the course of
common law, be otherwise re-examinable than may consist with the principles of
common law.

Seventhly. That in article 3d, section 2, the third clause be struck out, and in its place
be inserted the clauses following, to wit:
The trial of all crimes (except in cases of impeachments, and cases arising in the land
or naval forces, or the militia when on actual service, in time of war or public danger)
shall be by an impartial jury of freeholders of the vicinage, with the requisite of
unanimity for conviction, of the right of challenge, and other accustomed requisites;
and in all crimes punishable with loss of life or member, presentment or indictment by
a grand jury shall be an essential preliminary, provided that in cases of crimes
committed within any county which may be in possession of an enemy, or in which a
general insurrection may prevail, the trial may by law be authorized in some other
county of the same State, as near as may be to the seat of the offence.

In cases of crimes committed not within any county, the trial may by law be in such
county as the laws shall have prescribed. In suits at common law, between man and
man, the trial by jury, as one of the best securities to the rights of the people, ought to
remain inviolate.

Eighthly. That immediately after article 6th, be inserted, as article 7th, the clauses
following, to wit:

The powers delegated by this Constitution are appropriated to the departments to
which they are respectively distributed: so that the Legislative Department shall never
exercise the powers vested in the Executive or Judicial, nor the Executive exercise the
powers vested in the Legislative or Judicial, nor the Judicial exercise the powers
vested in the Legislative or Executive Departments.

The powers not delegated by this Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are
reserved to the States respectively.

Ninthly. That article 7th be numbered as article 8th.

The first of these amendments relates to what may be called a bill of rights. I will own
that I never considered this provision so essential to the Federal Constitution as to
make it improper to ratify it, until such an amendment was added; at the same time, I
always conceived, that in a certain form, and to a certain extent, such a provision was
neither improper nor altogether useless. I am aware that a great number of the most
respectable friends to the Government, and champions for republican liberty, have
thought such a provision not only unnecessary, but even improper; nay, I believe
some have gone so far as to think it even dangerous. Some policy has been made use
of, perhaps, by gentlemen on both sides of the question: I acknowledge the ingenuity
of those arguments which were drawn against the Constitution, by a comparison with
the policy of Great Britain, in establishing a declaration of rights; but there is too great
a difference in the case to warrant the comparison: therefore, the arguments drawn
from that source were in a great measure inapplicable. In the declaration of rights
which that country has established, the truth is, they have gone no farther than to raise
a barrier against the power of the Crown; the power of the Legislature is left
altogether indefinite. Although I know whenever the great rights, the trial by jury,
freedom of the press, or liberty of conscience, come in question in that body, the
invasion of them is resisted by able advocates, yet their Magna Charta does not
contain any one provision for the security of those rights, respecting which the people
of America are most alarmed. The freedom of the press and rights of conscience,
those choicest privileges of the people, are unguarded in the British Constitution.

But although the case may be widely different, and it may not be thought necessary to
provide limits for the legislative power in that country, yet a different opinion prevails
in the United States. The people of many States have thought it necessary to raise
barriers against power in all forms and departments of Government, and I am inclined
to believe, if once bills of rights are established in all the States as well as the Federal
Constitution, we shall find, that, although some of them are rather unimportant, yet,
upon the whole, they will have a salutary tendency. It may be said, in some instances,
they do no more than state the perfect equality of mankind. This, to be sure, is an
absolute truth, yet it is not absolutely necessary to be inserted at the head of a
Constitution.

In some instances they assert those rights which are exercised by the people in
forming and establishing a plan of Government. In other instances, they specify those
rights which are retained when particular powers are given up to be exercised by the
Legislature. In other instances, they specify positive rights, which may seem to result
from the nature of the compact. Trial by jury cannot be considered as a natural right,
but a right resulting from a social compact, which regulates the action of the
community, but is as essential to secure the liberty of the people as any one of the pre-
existent rights of nature. In other instances, they lay down dogmatic maxims with
respect to the construction of the Government; declaring that the Legislative,
Executive, and Judicial branches, shall be kept separate and distinct. Perhaps the best
way of securing this in practice is, to provide such checks as will prevent the
encroachment of the one upon the other.

But, whatever may be the form which the several States have adopted in making
declarations in favor of particular rights, the great object in view is to limit and
qualify the powers of Government, by excepting out of the grant of power those cases
in which the Government ought not to act, or to act only in a particular mode. They
point these exceptions sometimes against the abuse of the Executive power,
sometimes against the Legislative, and, in some cases, against the community itself;
or, in other words, against the majority in favor of the minority.

In our Government it is, perhaps, less necessary to guard against the abuse in the
Executive Department than any other; because it is not the stronger branch of the
system, but the weaker. It therefore must be levelled against the Legislative, for it is
the most powerful, and most likely to be abused, because it is under the least control.
Hence, so far as a declaration of rights can tend to prevent the exercise of undue
power, it cannot be doubted but such declaration is proper. But I confess that I do
conceive, that in a Government modified like this of the United States, the great
danger lies rather in the abuse of the community than in the Legislative body. The
prescriptions in favor of liberty ought to be levelled against that quarter where the
greatest danger lies, namely, that which possesses the highest prerogative of power.
But this is not found in either the Executive or Legislative departments of
Government, but in the body of the people, operating by the majority against the
minority.
It may be thought that all paper barriers against the power of the community are too
weak to be worthy of attention. I am sensible they are not so strong as to satisfy
gentlemen of every description who have seen and examined thoroughly the texture of
such a defence; yet, as they have a tendency to impress some degree of respect for
them, to establish the public opinion in their favor, and rouse the attention of the
whole community, it may be one means to control the majority from those acts to
which they might be otherwise inclined.

It has been said, by way of objection to a bill of rights, by many respectable
gentlemen out of doors, and I find opposition on the same principles likely to be made
by gentlemen on this floor, that they are unnecessary articles of a Republican
Government, upon the presumption that the people have those rights in their own
hands, and that is the proper place for them to rest. It would be a sufficient answer to
say, that this objection lies against such provisions under the State Governments, as
well as under the General Government; and there are, I believe, but few gentlemen
who are inclined to push their theory so far as to say that a declaration of rights in
those cases is either ineffectual or improper. It has been said, that in the Federal
Government they are unnecessary, because the powers are enumerated, and it follows,
that all that are not granted by the Constitution are retained; that the Constitution is a
bill of powers, the great residuum being the rights of the people; and, therefore, a bill
of rights cannot be so necessary as if the residuum was thrown into the hands of the
Government. I admit that these arguments are not entirely without foundation; but
they are not conclusive to the extent which has been supposed. It is true, the powers of
the General Government are circumscribed, they are directed to particular objects; but
even if Government keeps within those limits, it has certain discretionary powers with
respect to the means, which may admit of abuse to a certain extent, in the same
manner as the powers of the State Governments under their constitutions may to an
indefinite extent; because in the Constitution of the United States, there is a clause
granting to Congress the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper
for carrying into execution all the powers vested in the Government of the United
States, or in any department or officer thereof; this enables them to fulfil every
purpose for which the Government was established. Now, may not laws be considered
necessary and proper by Congress, (for it is for them to judge of the necessity and
propriety to accomplish those special purposes which they may have in
contemplation,) which laws in themselves are neither necessary nor proper; as well as
improper laws could be enacted by the State Legislatures, for fulfilling the more
extended objects of those Governments? I will state an instance, which I think in
point, and proves that this might be the case. The General Government has a right to
pass all laws which shall be necessary to collect its revenue; the means for enforcing
the collection are within the direction of the Legislature: may not general warrants be
considered necessary for this purpose, as well as for some purposes which it was
supposed at the framing of their constitutions the State Governments had in view? If
there was reason for restraining the State Governments from exercising this power,
there is like reason for restraining the Federal Government.

It may be said, indeed it has been said, that a bill of rights is not necessary, because
the establishment of this Government has not repealed those declarations of rights
which are added to the several State constitutions; that those rights of the people
which had been established by the most solemn act, could not be annihilated by a
subsequent act of that people, who meant and declared at the head of the instrument,
that they ordained and established a new system, for the express purpose of securing
to themselves and posterity the liberties they had gained by an arduous conflict.

I admit the force of this observation, but I do not look upon it to be conclusive. In the
first place, it is too uncertain ground to leave this provision upon, if a provision is at
all necessary to secure rights so important as many of those I have mentioned are
conceived to be, by the public in general, as well as those in particular who opposed
the adoption of this Constitution. Besides, some States have no bills of rights, there
are others provided with very defective ones, and there are others whose bills of rights
are not only defective, but absolutely improper; instead of securing some in the full
extent which republican principles would require, they limit them too much to agree
with the common ideas of liberty.

It has been objected also against a bill of rights, that, by enumerating particular
exceptions to the grant of power, it would disparage those rights which were not
placed in that enumeration; and it might follow by implication, that those rights which
were not singled out, were intended to be assigned into the hands of the General
Government, and were consequently insecure. This is one of the most plausible
arguments I have ever heard urged against the admission of a bill of rights into this
system; but, I conceive, that it may be guarded against. I have attempted it, as
gentlemen may see by turning to the last clause of the fourth resolution.

It has been said that it is unnecessary to load the Constitution with this provision,
because it was not found effectual in the constitution of the particular States. It is true,
there are a few particular States in which some of the most valuable articles have not,
at one time or other, been violated; but it does not follow but they may have, to a
certain degree, a salutary effect against the abuse of power. If they are incorporated
into the Constitution, independent tribunals of justice will consider themselves in a
peculiar manner the guardians of those rights; they will be an impenetrable bulwark
against every assumption of power in the Legislative or Executive; they will be
naturally led to resist every encroachment upon rights expressly stipulated for in the
Constitution by the declaration of rights. Besides this security, there is a great
probability that such a declaration in the federal system would be enforced; because
the State Legislatures will jealously and closely watch the operations of this
Government, and be able to resist with more effect every assumption of power, than
any other power on earth can do; and the greatest opponents to a Federal Government
admit the State Legislatures to be sure guardians of the people’s liberty. I conclude,
from this view of the subject, that it will be proper in itself, and highly politic, for the
tranquillity of the public mind, and the stability of the Government, that we should
offer something, in the form I have proposed, to be incorporated in the system of
Government, as a declaration of the rights of the people.

In the next place, I wish to see that part of the Constitution revised which declares that
the number of Representatives shall not exceed the proportion of one for every thirty
thousand persons, and allows one Representative to every State which rates below
that proportion. If we attend to the discussion of this subject, which has taken place in
the State conventions, and even in the opinion of the friends to the Constitution, an
alteration here is proper. It is the sense of the people of America, that the number of
Representatives ought to be increased, but particularly that it should not be left in the
discretion of the Government to diminish them, below that proportion, which
certainly is in the power of the Legislature, as the Constitution now stands; and they
may, as the population of the country increases, increase the House of Representatives
to a very unwieldy degree. I confess I always thought this part of the Constitution
defective, though not dangerous; and that it ought to be particularly attended to
whenever Congress should go into the consideration of amendments.

There are several minor cases enumerated in my proposition, in which I wish also to
see some alteration take place. That article which leaves it in the power of the
Legislature to ascertain its own emolument, is one to which I allude. I do not believe
this is a power which, in the ordinary course of Government, is likely to be abused.
Perhaps of all the powers granted, it is least likely to abuse; but there is a seeming
impropriety in leaving any set of men without control to put their hand into the public
coffers, to take out money to put in their pockets; there is a seeming indecorum in
such power, which leads me to propose a change. We have a guide to this alteration in
several of the amendments which the different conventions have proposed. I have
gone, therefore, so far as to fix it, that no law varying the compensation, shall operate
until there is a change in the Legislature; in which case it cannot be for the particular
benefit of those who are concerned in determining the value of the service.

I wish, also, in revising the Constitution, we may throw into that section, which
interdicts the abuse of certain powers in the State Legislatures, some other provisions
of equal, if not greater importance than those already made. The words, “No State
shall pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law,” &c., were wise and proper
restrictions in the Constitution. I think there is more danger of those powers being
abused by the State Governments than by the Government of the United States. The
same may be said of other powers which they possess, if not controlled by the general
principle, that laws are unconstitutional which infringe the rights of the community. I
should, therefore, wish to extend this interdiction, and add, as I have stated in the 5th
resolution, that no State shall violate the equal right of conscience, freedom of the
press, or trial by jury in criminal cases; because it is proper that every Government
should be disarmed of powers which trench upon those particular rights. I know, in
some of the State constitutions, the power of the Government is controlled by such a
declaration; but others are not. I cannot see any reason against obtaining even a
double security on those points; and nothing can give a more sincere proof of the
attachment of those who opposed this Constitution to these great and important rights,
than to see them join in obtaining the security I have now proposed; because it must
be admitted, on all hands, that the State Governments are as liable to attack these
invaluable privileges as the General Government is, and therefore ought to be as
cautiously guarded against.

I think it will be proper, with respect to the judiciary powers, to satisfy the public
mind on those points which I have mentioned. Great inconvenience has been
apprehended to suitors from the distance they would be dragged to obtain justice in
the Supreme Court of the United States, upon an appeal on an action for a small debt.
To remedy this, declare that no appeal shall be made unless the matter in controversy
amounts to a particular sum; this, with the regulations respecting jury trials in criminal
cases, and suits at common law, it is to be hoped, will quiet and reconcile the minds of
the people to that part of the Constitution.

I find, from looking into the amendments proposed by the State conventions, that
several are particularly anxious that it should be declared in the Constitution, that the
powers not therein delegated should be reserved to the several States. Perhaps other
words may define this more precisely than the whole of the instrument now does. I
admit they may be deemed unnecessary; but there can be no harm in making such a
declaration, if gentlemen will allow that the fact is as stated. I am sure I understand it
so, and do therefore propose it.

These are the points on which I wish to see a revision of the Constitution take place.
How far they will accord with the sense of this body, I cannot take upon me
absolutely to determine; but I believe every gentleman will readily admit that nothing
is in contemplation, so far as I have mentioned, that can endanger the beauty of the
Government in any one important feature, even in the eyes of its most sanguine
admirers. I have proposed nothing that does not appear to me as proper in itself, or
eligible as patronised by a respectable number of our fellow-citizens; and if we can
make the Constitution better in the opinion of those who are opposed to it, without
weakening its frame, or abridging its usefulness in the judgment of those who are
attached to it, we act the part of wise and liberal men to make such alterations as shall
produce that effect.

Having done what I conceived was my duty, in bringing before this House the subject
of amendments, and also stated such as I wish for and approve, and offered the
reasons which occurred to me in their support, I shall content myself, for the present,
with moving “that a committee be appointed to consider of and report such
amendments as ought to be proposed by Congress to the Legislatures of the States, to
become, if ratified by three-fourths thereof, part of the Constitution of the United
States.” By agreeing to this motion, the subject may be going on in the committee,
while other important business is proceeding to a conclusion in the House. I should
advocate greater despatch in the business of amendments, if I were not convinced of
the absolute necessity there is of pursuing the organization of the Government;
because I think we should obtain the confidence of our fellow-citizens, in proportion
as we fortify the rights of the people against the encroachments of the Government.1

JUNE 16. POWER OF REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.

If the construction of the Constitution is to be left to its natural course, with respect to
the Executive powers of this Government, I own that the insertion of this sentiment1
in law may not be of material importance, though, if it is nothing more than a mere
declaration of a clear grant made by the Constitution, it can do no harm; but if it
relates to a doubtful part of the Constitution, I suppose an exposition of the
Constitution may come with as much propriety from the Legislature, as any other
department of the Government. If the power naturally belongs to the Government, and
the Constitution is undecided as to the body which is to exercise it, it is likely that it is
submitted to the discretion of the Legislature, and the question will depend upon its
own merits.

I am clearly of opinion with the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. Smith,) that we
ought in this, and every other case, to adhere to the Constitution, so far as it will serve
as a guide to us, and that we ought not to be swayed in our decisions by the splendor
of the character of the present Chief Magistrate, but to consider it with respect to the
merit of men who, in the ordinary course of things, may be supposed to fill the Chair.
I believe the power here declared is a high one, and, in some respects, a dangerous
one; but, in order to come to a right decision on this point, we must consider both
sides of the question: the possible abuses which may spring from the single will of the
First Magistrate, and the abuse which may spring from the combined will of the
Executive and Senatorial disqualification.

When we consider that the First Magistrate is to be appointed at present by the
suffrages of three millions of people, and, in all human probability, in a few years’
time by double that number, it is not to be presumed that a vicious or bad character
will be selected. If the Government of any country on the face of the earth was ever
effectually guarded against the election of ambitious or designing characters to the
first office of the State, I think it may with truth be said to be the case under the
Constitution of the United States. With all the infirmities incident to a popular
election, corrected by the particular mode of conducting it, as directed under the
present system, I think we may fairly calculate that the instances will be very rare in
which an unworthy man will receive that mark of the public confidence which is
required to designate the President of the United States. Where the people are
disposed to give so great an elevation to one of their fellow-citizens, I own that I am
not afraid to place my confidence in him, especially when I know he is impeachable
for any crime or misdemeanor before the Senate, at all times; and that, at all events,
he is impeachable before the community at large every four years, and liable to be
displaced if his conduct shall have given umbrage during the time he has been in
office. Under these circumstances, although the trust is a high one, and in some
degree, perhaps, a dangerous one, I am not sure but it will be safer here than placed
where some gentlemen suppose it ought to be.

It is evidently the intention of the Constitution, that the first Magistrate should be
responsible for the Executive department; so far therefore as we do not make the
officers who are to aid him in the duties of that department responsible to him, he is
not responsible to his country. Again, is there no danger that an officer, when he is
appointed by the concurrence of the Senate, and has friends in that body, may choose
rather to risk his establishment on the favor of that branch, than rest it upon the
discharge of his duties to the satisfaction of the Executive branch, which is
constitutionally authorized to inspect and control his conduct? And if it should happen
that the officers connect themselves with the Senate, they may mutually support each
other, and for want of efficacy reduce the power of the President to a mere vapor; in
which case, his responsibility would be annihilated, and the expectation of it unjust.
The high Executive officers, joined in cabal with the Senate, would lay the foundation
of discord, and end in an assumption of the Executive power, only to be removed by a
revolution in the Government. I believe no principle is more clearly laid down in the
Constitution than that of responsibility. After premising this, I will proceed to an
investigation of the merits of the question upon Constitutional ground.

I have, since the subject was last before the House, examined the Constitution with
attention, and I acknowledge that it does not perfectly correspond with the ideas I
entertained of it from the first glance. I am inclined to think, that a free and systematic
interpretation of the plan of Government will leave us less at liberty to abate the
responsibility than gentlemen imagine. I have already acknowledged that the powers
of the Government must remain as apportioned by the Constitution. But it may be
contended, that where the Constitution is silent, it becomes a subject of legislative
discretion; perhaps, in the opinion of some, an argument in favor of the clause may be
successfully brought forward on this ground: I, however, leave it for the present
untouched.

By a strict examination of the Constitution, on what appears to be its true principles,
and considering the great departments of the Government in the relation they have to
each other, I have my doubts whether we are not absolutely tied down to the
construction declared in the bill. In the first section of the first article, it is said, that
all Legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United
States. In the second article, it is affirmed that the Executive power shall be vested in
a President of the United States of America. In the third article, it is declared that the
Judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in such
Inferior Courts as Congress may, from time to time, ordain and establish. I suppose it
will be readily admitted, that so far as the Constitution has separated the powers of
these great departments, it would be improper to combine them together; and so far as
it has left any particular department in the entire possession of the powers incident to
that department, I conceive we ought not to qualify them further than they are
qualified by the Constitution. The Legislative powers are vested in Congress, and are
to be exercised by them uncontrolled by any other department, except the Constitution
has qualified it otherwise. The Constitution has qualified the Legislative power, by
authorizing the President to object to any act it may pass, requiring, in this case, two-
thirds of both Houses to concur in making a law; but still the absolute Legislative
power is vested in the Congress with this qualification alone.

The Constitution affirms, that the Executive power shall be vested in the President.
Are there exceptions to this proposition? Yes, there are. The Constitution says, that in
appointing to office, the Senate shall be associated with the President, unless in the
case of inferior officers, when the law shall otherwise direct. Have we a right to
extend this exception? I believe not. If the Constitution has invested all Executive
power in the President, I venture to assert that the Legislature has no right to diminish
or modify his Executive authority.

The question now resolves itself into this, Is the power of displacing an Executive
power? I conceive that if any power whatsoever is in its nature Executive, it is the
power of appointing, overseeing, and controlling those who execute the laws. If the
Constitution had not qualified the power of the President in appointing to office, by
associating the Senate with him in that business, would it not be clear that he would
have the right, by virtue of his Executive power, to make such appointment? Should
we be authorized, in defiance of that clause in the Constitution,—“The Executive
power shall be vested in a President,” to unite the Senate, with the President in the
appointment to office? I conceive not. If it is admitted that we should not be
authorized to do this, I think it may be disputed whether we have a right to associate
them in removing persons from office, the one power being as much of an Executive
nature as the other; and the first only is authorized by being excepted out of the
general rule established by the Constitution, in these words, “the Executive power
shall be vested in the President.”

The Judicial power is vested in a Supreme Court; but will gentlemen say the judicial
power can be placed elsewhere, unless the Constitution has made an exception? The
Constitution justifies the Senate in exercising a judiciary power in determining on
impeachments; but can the judicial power be further blended with the powers of that
body? They cannot. I therefore say it is incontrovertible, if neither the Legislative nor
Judicial powers are subjected to qualifications, other than those demanded in the
Constitution, that the Executive powers are equally unabateable as either of the
others; and inasmuch as the power of removal is of an Executive nature, and not
affected by any Constitutional exception, it is beyond the reach of the Legislative
body.

If this is the true construction of this instrument, the clause in the bill is nothing more
than explanatory of the meaning of the Constitution, and therefore not liable to any
particular objection on that account. If the Constitution is silent, and it is a power the
Legislature have a right to confer, it will appear to the world, if we strike out the
clause, as if we doubted the propriety of vesting it in the President of the United
States. I therefore think it best to retain it in the bill.

JUNE 17. POWER OF REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.

However various the opinions which exist upon the point now before us, it seems
agreed on all sides, that it demands a careful investigation and full discussion. I feel
the importance of the question, and know that our decision will involve the decision
of all similar cases. The decision that is at this time made, will become the permanent
exposition of the Constitution; and on a permanent exposition of the Constitution will
depend the genius and character of the whole Government. It will depend, perhaps, on
this decision, whether the Government shall retain that equilibrium which the
Constitution intended, or take a direction towards aristocracy or anarchy among the
members of the Government. Hence, how careful ought we to be to give a true
direction to a power so critically circumstanced! It is incumbent on us to weigh with
particular attention, the arguments which have been advanced in support of the
various opinions with cautious deliberation. I own to you, Mr. Chairman, that I feel
great anxiety upon this question; I feel an anxiety, because I am called upon to give a
decision in a case that may affect the fundamental principles of the Government under
which we act, and liberty itself. But all that I can do on such an occasion is, to weigh
well every thing advanced on both sides with the purest desire to find out the true
meaning of the Constitution, and to be guided by that, and an attachment to the true
spirit of liberty, whose influence I believe strongly predominates here.
Several constructions have been put upon the Constitution relative to the point in
question. The gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. Sherman) has advanced a doctrine
which was not touched upon before. He seems to think (if I understood him rightly)
that the power of displacing from office is subject to Legislative discretion; because it
having a right to create, it may limit or modify as it thinks proper. I shall not say but
at first view this doctrine may seem to have some plausibility. But when I consider
that the Constitution clearly intended to maintain a marked distinction between the
Legislative, Executive, and Judicial powers of Government; and when I consider, that,
if the Legislature has a power, such as is contended for, they may subject and transfer
at discretion powers from one department of our Government to another; they may, on
that principle, exclude the President altogether from exercising any authority in the
removal of officers; they may give it to the Senate alone, or the President and Senate
combined; they may vest it in the whole Congress, or they may reserve it to be
exercised by this House. When I consider the consequences of this doctrine, and
compare them with the true principles of the Constitution, I own that I cannot
subscribe to it.

Another doctrine, which has found very respectable friends, has been particularly
advocated by the gentleman from South Carolina, (Mr. Smith.) It is this: when an
officer is appointed by the President and Senate, he can only be displaced for
malfeasance in his office by impeachment. I think this would give a stability to the
Executive department, so far as it may be described by the heads of departments,
which is more incompatible with the genius of republican Governments in general,
and this Constitution in particular, than any doctrine which has yet been proposed.
The danger to liberty, the danger of mal-administration, has not yet been found to lie
so much in the facility of introducing improper persons into office, as in the difficulty
of displacing those who are unworthy of the public trust. If it is said that an officer
once appointed shall not be displaced without the formality required by impeachment,
I shall be glad to know what security we have for the faithful administration of the
Government? Every individual, in the long chain which extends from the highest to
the lowest link of the Executive Magistracy, would find a security in his situation
which would relax his fidelity and promptitude in the discharge of his duty.

The doctrine, however, which seems to stand most in opposition to the principles I
contend for, is, that the power to annual an appointment is, in the nature of things,
incidental to the power which makes the appointment. I agree that if nothing more
was said in the Constitution than that the President, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, should appoint to office, there would be a great force in saying
that the power of removal resulted by a natural implication from the power of
appointing. But there is another part of the Constitution, no less explicit than the one
on which the gentleman’s doctrine is founded; it is that part which declares that the
Executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States. The association of
the Senate with the President in exercising that particular function, is an exception to
this general rule; and exceptions to general rules, I conceive, are ever to be taken
strictly. But there is another part of the Constitution, which inclines, in my judgment,
to favor the construction I put upon it; the President is required to take care that the
laws be faithfully executed. If the duty to see the laws faithfully executed be required
at the hands of the Executive Magistrate, it would seem that it was generally intended
he should have that species of power which is necessary to accomplish that end. Now,
if the officer when once appointed is not to depend upon the President for his official
existence, but upon a distinct body, (for where there are two negatives required, either
can prevent the removal,) I confess I do not see how the President can take care that
the laws be faithfully executed. It is true, by a circuitous operation he may obtain an
impeachment, and even without this it is possible he may obtain the concurrence of
the Senate, for the purpose of displacing an officer; but would this give that species of
control to the Executive Magistrate which seems to be required by the Constitution? I
own, if my opinion was not contrary to that entertained by what I suppose to be the
minority on this question, I should be doubtful of being mistaken, when I discovered
how inconsistent that construction would make the Constitution with itself. I can
hardly bring myself to imagine the wisdom of the convention who framed the
Constitution contemplated such incongruity.

There is another maxim which ought to direct us in expounding the Constitution, and
is of great importance. It is laid down, in most of the Constitutions or bills of rights in
the republics of America; it is to be found in the political writings of the most
celebrated civilians, and is every where held as essential to the preservation of liberty,
that the three great departments of Government be kept separate and distinct; and if in
any case they are blended, it is in order to admit a partial qualification, in order more
effectually to guard against an entire consolidation. I think, therefore, when we review
the several parts of this Constitution, when it says that the Legislative powers shall be
vested in a Congress of the United States, under certain exceptions, and the Executive
power vested in the President with certain exceptions, we must suppose they were
intended to be kept separate in all cases in which they are not blended, and ought,
consequently, to expound the Constitution so as to blend them as little as possible.

Every thing relative to the merits of the question as distinguished from a
Constitutional question, seems to turn on the danger of such a power vested in the
President alone. But when I consider the checks under which he lies in the exercise of
this power, I own to you I feel no apprehensions but what arise from the dangers
incidental to the power itself; for dangers will be incidental to it, vest it where you
please. I will not reiterate what was said before with respect to the mode of election,
and the extreme improbability that any citizen will be selected from the mass of
citizens who is not highly distinguished by his abilities and worth; in this alone we
have no small security for the faithful exercise of this power. But, throwing that out of
the question, let us consider the restraints he will feel after he is placed in that
elevated station. It is to be remarked, that the power in this case will not consist so
much in continuing a bad man in office, as in the danger of displacing a good one.
Perhaps the great danger, as has been observed, of abuse in the Executive power, lies
in the improper continuance of bad men in office. But the power we contend for will
not enable him to do this; for if an unworthy man be continued in office by an
unworthy President, the House of Representatives can at any time impeach him, and
the Senate can remove him, whether the President chooses or not. The danger then
consists merely in this: the President can displace from office a man whose merits
require that he should be continued in it. What will be the motives which the President
can feel for such abuse of his power, and the restraints that operate to prevent it? In
the first place, he will be impeachable by this House, before the Senate for such an act
of mal-administration; for I contend that the wanton removal of meritorious officers
would subject him to impeachment and removal from his own high trust. But what
can be his motives for displacing a worthy man? It must be that he may fill the place
with an unworthy creature of his own. Can he accomplish this end? No; he can place
no man in the vacancy whom the Senate shall not approve; and if he could fill the
vacancy with the man he might choose, I am sure he would have little inducement to
make an improper removal. Let us consider the consequences. The injured man will
be supported by the popular opinion; the community will take side with him against
the President; it will facilitate those combinations, and give success to those exertions
which will be pursued to prevent his re-election. To displace a man of high merit, and
who from his station may be supposed a man of extensive influence are
considerations in the mind of any man who may fill the Presidential chair. The friends
of those individuals and the public sympathy will be against him. If this should not
produce his impeachment before the Senate, it will amount to an impeachment before
the community, who will have the power of punishment, by refusing to re-elect him.
But suppose this persecuted individual cannot obtain revenge in this mode; there are
other modes in which he could make the situation of the President very inconvenient,
if you suppose him resolutely bent on executing the dictates of resentment. If he had
not influence enough to direct the vengeance of the whole community, he may
probably be able to obtain an appointment in one or the other branch of the
Legislature; and being a man of weight, talents, and influence, in either case he may
prove to the President troublesome indeed. We have seen examples in the history of
other nations, which justify the remark I now have made. Though the prerogatives of
the British King are great as his rank, and it is unquestionably known that he has a
positive influence over both branches of the legislative body, yet there have been
examples in which the appointment and removal of ministers have been found to be
dictated by one or other of those branches. Now if this be the case with an hereditary
Monarch, possessed of those high prerogatives and furnished with so many means of
influence; can we suppose a President, elected for four years only, dependent upon the
popular voice, impeachable by the Legislature, little, if at all, distinguished for wealth,
personal talents, or influence from the head of the department himself; I say, will he
bid defiance to all these considerations, and wantonly dismiss a meritorious and
virtuous officer? Such abuse of power exceeds my conception. If any thing takes
place in the ordinary course of business of this kind, my imagination cannot extend to
it on any rational principle. But let us not consider the question on one side only; there
are dangers to be contemplated on the other. Vest this power in the Senate jointly with
the President, and you abolish at once that great principle of unity and responsibility
in the Executive department, which was intended for the security of liberty and the
public good. If the President should possess alone the power of removal from office,
those who are employed in the execution of the law will be in their proper situation,
and the chain of dependence be preserved; the lowest officers, the middle grade, and
the highest, will depend, as they ought, on the President, and the President on the
community. The chain of dependence therefore terminates in the supreme body,
namely, in the people, who will possess, besides, in aid of their original power, the
decisive engine of impeachment. Take the other supposition; that the power should be
vested in the Senate, on the principle that the power to displace is necessarily
connected with the power to appoint. It is declared by the Constitution, that we may
by law vest the appointment of inferior officers in the heads of departments; the
power of removal being incidental, as stated by some gentlemen. Where does this
terminate? If you begin with the subordinate officers, they are dependent on their
superior, he on the next superior, and he on—whom? On the Senate, a permanent
body; a body, by its particular mode of election, in reality existing forever; a body
possessing that proportion of aristocratic power which the Constitution no doubt
thought wise to be established in the system, but which some have strongly excepted
against. And let me ask gentlemen, is there equal security in this case as in the other?
Shall we trust the Senate, responsible to individual Legislatures, rather than the person
who is responsible to the whole community? It is true, the Senate do not hold their
offices for life, like aristocracies recorded in the historic page; yet the fact is, they will
not possess that responsibility for the exercise of Executive powers which would
render it safe for us to vest such powers in them. But what an aspect will this give to
the Executive. Instead of keeping the departments of Government distinct, you make
an Executive out of one branch of the Legislature; you make the Executive a two-
headed monster, to use the expression of the gentleman from New Hampshire, (Mr.
Livermore,) you destroy the great principle of responsibility, and perhaps have the
creature divided in its will, defeating the very purposes for which a unity in the
Executive was instituted. These objections do not lie against such an arrangement as
the bill establishes. I conceive that the President is sufficiently accountable to the
community; and if this power is vested in him, it will be vested where its nature
requires it should be vested; if anything in its nature is executive, it must be that
power which is employed in superintending and seeing that the laws are faithfully
executed. The laws cannot be executed but by officers appointed for that purpose;
therefore, those who are over such officers naturally possess the Executive power. If
any other doctrine be admitted, what is the consequence? You may set the Senate at
the head of the Executive department, or you may require that the officers hold their
places during the pleasure of this branch of the Legislature, if you cannot go so far as
to say we shall appoint them; and by this means, you link together two branches of the
Government which the preservation of liberty requires to be constantly separated.

Another species of argument has been urged against this clause. It is said, that it is
improper, or at least unnecessary, to come to any decision on this subject. It has been
said by one gentleman, that it would be officious in this branch of the Legislature to
expound the Constitution, so far as it relates to the division of power between the
President and Senate; it is incontrovertibly of as much importance to this branch of
the Government as to any other, that the Constitution should be preserved entire. It is
our duty, so far as it depends upon us, to take care that the powers of the Constitution
be preserved entire to every department of Government; the breach of the Constitution
in one point, will facilitate the breach in another; a breach in this point may destroy
that equilibrium by which the House retains its consequence and share of power;
therefore we are not chargeable with an officious interference. Besides, the bill,
before it can have effect, must be submitted to both those branches who are
particularly interested in it; the Senate may negative, or the President may object, if he
thinks it unconstitutional.

But the great objection drawn from the source to which the last arguments would lead
us is, that the Legislature itself has no right to expound the Constitution; that
wherever its meaning is doubtful, you must leave it to take its course, until the
Judiciary is called upon to declare its meaning. I acknowledge, in the ordinary course
of Government, that the exposition of the laws and Constitution devolves upon the
Judiciary. But I beg to know, upon what principle it can be contended, that any one
department draws from the Constitution greater powers than another, in marking out
the limits of the powers of the several departments? The Constitution is the charter of
the people to the Government; it specifies certain great powers as absolutely granted,
and marks out the departments to exercise them. If the Constitutional boundary of
either be brought into question, I do not see that any one of these independent
departments has more right than another to declare their sentiments on that point.

Perhaps this is an omitted case. There is not one Government on the face of the earth,
so far as I recollect, there is not one in the United States, in which provision is made
for a particular authority to determine the limits of the Constitutional division of
power between the branches of the Government. In all systems there are points which
must be adjusted by the departments themselves, to which no one of them is
competent. If it cannot be determined in this way, there is no resource left but the will
of the community, to be collected in some mode to be provided by the Constitution, or
one dictated by the necessity of the case. It is therefore a fair question, whether this
great point may not as well be decided, at least by the whole Legislature as by a part,
by us as well as by the Executive or Judiciary? As I think it will be equally
Constitutional, I cannot imagine it will be less safe, that the exposition should issue
from the Legislative authority than any other; and the more so, because it involves in
the decision the opinions of both those departments, whose powers are supposed to be
affected by it. Besides, I do not see in what way this question could come before the
judges, to obtain a fair and solemn decision; but even if it were the case that it could, I
should suppose, at least while the Government is not led by passion, disturbed by
faction, or deceived by any discolored medium of sight, but while there is a desire in
all to see and be guided by the benignant ray of truth, that the decision may be made
with the most advantage by the Legislature itself.

My conclusion from these reflections is, that it will be Constitutional to retain the
clause; that it expresses the meaning of the Constitution as must be established by fair
construction, and a construction which, upon the whole, not only consists with liberty,
but is more favorable to it than any one of the interpretations that have been
proposed.1

JUNE 18. POWER OF REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.

The question now seems to be brought to this, whether it is proper or improper to
retain these words in the clause, provided they are explanatory of the Constitution. I
think this branch of the Legislature is as much interested in the establishment of the
true meaning of the Constitution, as either the President or Senate; and when the
Constitution submits it to us to establish offices by law, we ought to know by what
tenure the office should be held; and whether it should depend upon the concurrence
of the Senate with the President, or upon the will of the President alone; because
gentlemen may hesitate in either case, whether they will make it for an indefinite or
precise time. If the officer can be removed at discretion by the President, there may be
safety in letting it be for an indefinite period. If he cannot exert his prerogative, there
is no security even by the mode of impeachment; because the officer may intrench
himself behind the authority of the Senate, and bid defiance to every other department
of Government. In this case, the question of duration would take a different turn.
Hence it is highly proper that we and our constituents should know the tenure of the
office. And have we not as good a right as any branch of the Government to declare
our sense of the meaning of the Constitution?

Nothing has yet been offered to invalidate the doctrine, that the meaning of the
Constitution may as well be ascertained by the legislative as by the judicial authority.
When the question emerges as it does in this bill, and much seems to depend upon it, I
should conceive it highly proper to make a legislative construction. In another point of
view it is proper that this interpretation should now take place, rather than at a time
when the exigency of the case may require the exercise of the power of removal. At
present, the disposition of every gentleman is to seek the truth, and abide by its
guidance when it is discovered. I have reason to believe the same disposition prevails
in the Senate. But will this be the case when some individual officer of high rank
draws into question the capacity of the President, with the Senate, to effect his
removal? If we leave the Constitution to take this course, it can never be expounded
until the President shall think it expedient to exercise the right of removal, if he
supposes he has it; then the Senate may be induced to set up their pretensions. And
will they decide so calmly as at this time, when no important officer in any of the
great departments is appointed to influence their judgments? The imagination of no
member here, or of the Senate, or of the President himself, is heated or disturbed by
faction. If ever a proper moment for decision should offer, it must be one like the
present.

I do not conceive that this question has been truly stated by some gentlemen. In my
opinion it is not whether we shall take the power from one branch of the Government
and give it to another; but the question is, to which branch has the Constitution given
it? Some gentlemen have said, that it resides in the people at large; and that if it is
necessary to the Government, we must apply to the people for it, and obtain it by way
of amendment to the Constitution. Some gentlemen contend, that although it is given
in the Constitution, as a necessary power to carry into execution the other powers
vested by the Constitution, yet it is vested in the Legislature. I cannot admit this
doctrine either; because it is setting the Legislature at the head of the Executive
branch of the Government. If we take the other construction of the gentleman from
South Carolina, that all officers hold their places by the firm tenure of good
behaviour, we shall find it still more improper. I think gentlemen will see, upon
reflection, that this doctrine is incompatible with the principles of free Government. If
there is no removability but by way of impeachment, then all the Executive officers of
Government hold their offices by the firm tenure of good behaviour, from the Chief
Justice down to the tide waiter.

[Mr. Smith interrupted Mr. M., and said that he had admitted that inferior officers
might be removed, because the Constitution had left it in the power of the Legislature
to establish them on what terms they pleased; consequently, to direct their
appointment and removal.]
Mr. Madison had understood the gentleman as he now explained himself. But still he
contended, that the consequences he had drawn would necessarily follow; because
there was no express authority given to the Legislature in the Constitution to enable
the President, the courts of law, or heads of the departments, to remove an inferior
officer; all that was said on that head was confined solely to the power of appointing
them. If the gentleman admits that the Legislature may vest the power of removal,
with respect to inferior officers, he must also admit that the Constitution vests the
President with the power of removal in the case of superior officers; because both
powers are implied in the same words. The President may appoint the one class, and
the Legislature may authorize the courts of law or heads of departments to appoint in
the other case. If then it is admitted that the power of removal vests in the President,
or President and Senate, the arguments which I urged yesterday, and those which have
been urged by honorable gentlemen on this side of the question for these three days
past, will fully evince the truth of the construction which we give, that the power is in
the President alone. I will not repeat them, because they must have full possession of
every gentleman’s mind. I am willing, therefore, to rest the decision here; and hope
that it will be made in such a manner as to perpetuate the blessings which this
Constitution was intended to embrace.1

JUNE 22. POWER OF REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.

I am in favor of the motion for striking out, but not upon the principles of my worthy
colleague.1 I will briefly state my reasons for voting in the manner I intend. First,
altering the mode of expression tends to give satisfaction to those gentlemen who
think it not an object of legislative discretion; and second, because the amendment
already agreed to fully contains the sense of this House upon the doctrine of the
Constitution; and therefore the words are unnecessary as they stand here. I will not
trouble the House with repeating reasons why the change of expression is best, as they
are well understood. But gentlemen cannot fairly urge against us a change of ground,
because the point we contended for is fully obtained by the amendment. It was truly
said by the gentleman from New York, (Mr. Benson,) that these words carry with
them an implication that the Legislature has the power of granting the power of
removal.

It is needless to assign my reasons why I think the Legislature not in possession of
this power; they were fully explained before. I therefore shall only say, if there is a
principle in our Constitution, indeed in any free Constitution, more sacred than
another, it is that which separates the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial powers. If
there is any point in which the separation of the Legislative and Executive powers
ought to be maintained with greater caution, it is that which relates to officers and
offices. The powers relative to offices are partly Legislative and partly Executive. The
Legislature creates the office, defines the powers, limits its duration, and annexes a
compensation. This done, the Legislative power ceases. They ought to have nothing to
do with designating the man to fill the office. That I conceive to be of an Executive
nature. Although it be qualified in the Constitution, I would not extend or strain that
qualification beyond the limits precisely fixed for it. We ought always to consider the
Constitution with an eye to the principles upon which it was founded. In this point of
view, we shall readily conclude that if the Legislature determines the powers, the
honors, and emoluments of an office, we should be insecure if they were to designate
the officer also. The nature of things restrains and confines the Legislative and
Executive authorities in this respect; and hence it is that the Constitution stipulates for
the independence of each branch of the Government.

Let it be understood that the Legislature is to have some influence both in appointing
and removing officers, and I venture to say the people of America will justly fear a
system of sinecures. What security have they that offices will not be created to
accommodate favorites or pensioners subservient to their designs? I never did
conceive, that so far as the Constitution gave one branch of the Legislature an agency
in this business, it was, by any means, one of its most meritorious parts; but so far as
it has gone, I confess I would be as unwilling to abridge the power of that body as to
enlarge it. But considering, as I do, that the Constitution fairly vests the President with
the power, and that the amendment declares this to be the sense of the House, I shall
concur with the gentlemen in opposition so far as to strike out these words, which I
now look upon to be useless.

I have a great respect for the abilities and judgment of my worthy colleague, (Mr.
Page,) and am convinced he is inspired by the purest motives in his opposition to what
he conceives to be an improper measure; but I hope he will not think so strange of our
difference, if he considers the small proportion of the House which concurs with him
with respect to impeachment being the only way of removing officers. I believe the
opinion is held but by one gentleman besides himself. If this sentiment were to obtain,
it would give rise to more objections to the Constitution than gentlemen are aware of;
more than any other construction whatever. Yet while he professes to be greatly
alarmed on one account, he possesses a stoic apathy with respect to the other.

JUNE 29. DUTIES OF THE COMPTROLLER.

Mr. Madison observed, that the committee had gone through the bill without making
any provision respecting the tenure by which the Comptroller is to hold his office. He
thought it was a point worthy of consideration, and would, therefore, submit a few
observations upon it.

It will be necessary, said he, to consider the nature of this office, to enable us to come
to a right decision on the subject; in analyzing its properties, we shall easily discover
they are not purely of an Executive nature. It seems to me that they partake of a
Judiciary quality as well as Executive; perhaps the latter obtains in the greatest
degree. The principal duty seems to be deciding upon the lawfulness and justice of the
claims and accounts subsisting between the United States and particular citizens: this
partakes strongly of the judicial character, and there may be strong reasons why an
officer of this kind should not hold his office at the pleasure of the Executive branch
of the Government. I am inclined to think that we ought to consider him something in
the light of an arbitrator between the public and individuals, and that he ought to hold
his office by such a tenure as will make him responsible to the public generally; then
again it may be thought, on the other side, that some persons ought to be authorized
on behalf of the individual, with the usual liberty of referring to a third person, in case
of disagreement, which may throw some embarrassment in the way of the first idea.
Whatever, Mr. Chairman, may be my opinion with respect to the tenure by which an
Executive officer may hold his office according to the meaning of the Constitution, I
am very well satisfied, that a modification by the Legislature may take place in such
as partake of the judicial qualities, and that the legislative power is sufficient to
establish this office on such a footing as to answer the purposes for which it is
prescribed.

With this view he would move a proposition, to be inserted in the bill; it was that the
Comptroller should hold his office during — years, unless sooner removed by the
President: he will always be dependent upon the Legislature, by reason of the power
of impeachment, but he might be made still more so, when the House took up the
Salary bill. He would have the person re-appointable at the expiration of the term,
unless he was disqualified by a conviction on an impeachment before the Senate; by
this means the Comptroller would be dependent upon the President, because he can be
removed by him; he will be dependent upon the Senate, because they must consent to
his election for every term of years; and he will be dependent upon this House,
through the means of impeachment, and the power we shall reserve over his salary; by
which means we shall effectually secure the dependence of this officer upon the
Government. But making him thus thoroughly dependent, would make it necessary to
secure his impartiality, with respect to the individual. This might be effected by
giving any person, who conceived himself aggrieved, a right to petition the Supreme
Court for redress, and they should be empowered to do right therein; this will enable
the individual to carry his claim before an independent tribunal.

A provision of this kind exists in two of the United States at this time, and is found to
answer a very good purpose. He mentioned this, that gentlemen might not think it
altogether novel. The committee, he hoped, would take a little time to examine the
idea.1

AUGUST 13. AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION.

Mr. Madison did not think it was an improper time to proceed in this business; the
House had already gone through with subjects of a less interesting nature; now if the
Judiciary bill was of such vast importance, its consideration ought not to have been
postponed for those purposes.

He would remind gentlemen that there were many who conceived amendments of
some kind necessary and proper in themselves; while others who are not so well
satisfied of the necessity and propriety, may think they are rendered expedient from
some other consideration. Is it desirable to keep up a division among the people of the
United States on a point in which they consider their most essential rights are
concerned? If this is an object worthy the attention of such a numerous part of our
constituents, why should we decline taking it into our consideration, and thereby
promote that spirit of urbanity and unanimity which the Government itself stands in
need of for its more full support?
Already has the subject been delayed much longer than could have been wished. If
after having fixed a day for taking it into consideration, we should put it off again, a
spirit of jealousy may be excited, and not allayed without great inconvenience.

Form, sir, is always of less importance than the substance; but on this occasion I
admit that form is of some consequence, and it will be well for the House to pursue
that which, upon reflection, shall appear to be the most eligible. Now it appears to me,
that there is a neatness and propriety in incorporating the amendments into the
Constitution itself; in that case, the system will remain uniform and entire; it will
certainly be more simple when the amendments are interwoven into those parts to
which they naturally belong, than it will if they consist of separate and distinct parts.
We shall then be able to determine its meaning without references or comparison;
whereas, if they are supplementary, its meaning can only be ascertained by a
comparison of the two instruments, which will be a very considerable embarrassment.
It will be difficult to ascertain to what parts of the instrument the amendments
particularly refer; they will create unfavorable comparisons; whereas, if they are
placed upon the footing here proposed, they will stand upon as good foundation as the
original work. Nor is it so uncommon a thing as gentlemen suppose; systematic men
frequently take up the whole law, and, with its amendments and alterations, reduce it
into one act. I am not, however, very solicitous about the form, provided the business
is but well completed.1

SEPTEMBER 3. LOCATION OF THE CAPITAL.

Mr. Madison meant to pay due attention to every argument that could be urged on this
important question. Facts had been asserted, the impressions of which he wished to be
erased, if they were not well founded. It has been said, that the communication with
the Western Territory, by the Susquehanna, is more convenient than by the Potomac. I
apprehend this is not the case; and the propriety of our decision will depend, in a great
measure, on the superior advantages of one of these two streams. It is agreed, on all
hands, that we ought to have some regard to the convenience of the Atlantic
navigation. Now, to embrace this object, a position must be taken on some navigable
river; to favor the communication with the Western Territory, its arms ought likewise
to extend themselves towards that region. I did not suppose it would have been
necessary to bring forward charts and maps, as has been done by others, to show the
committee the comparative situation of those rivers. I flattered myself it was
sufficiently understood, to enable us to decide the question of superiority; but I am
now inclined to believe, that gentlemen have embraced an error, and I hope they are
not determined to vote under improper impressions. I venture to pledge myself for the
demonstration, that the communication with the Western Territory, by the Potomac, is
more certain and convenient than the other. And if the question is as important as it is
admitted to be, gentlemen will not shut their ears to information; they will not
precipitate the decision; or if they regard the satisfaction of our constituents, they will
allow them to be informed of all the facts and arguments that lead to the decision of a
question in which the general and particular interests of all parts of the Union are
involved.1
SEPTEMBER 18. LOCATION OF THE CAPITAL.

Mr. Madison felt himself compelled to move for striking out that part of the bill which
provided that the temporary residence of Congress should continue at New York; as
he conceived it irreconcilable with the spirit of the Constitution. If it was not from
viewing it in this light, he should have given the bill no further opposition; and now
he did not mean to enter on the merits of the main question.

From the Constitution, it appeared that the concurrence of the two Houses of
Congress was sufficient to enable them to adjourn from one place to another; nay, the
legal consent of the President was, in some degree, prescribed in the 7th section of
article 1st, where it is declared, that every order, resolution, or vote, to which the
concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary, (except on
a question of adjournment,) shall be presented to the President of the United States,
and approved by him, before the same shall take effect. Any attempt, therefore, to
adjourn by law, is a violation of that part of the Constitution which gives the power,
exclusively, to the two branches of the Legislature. If gentlemen saw it in the same
light, he flattered himself they would reject that part of the bill; and, however little
they valued the reflection that this city was not central, which had been so often
urged, they would be guided by arguments springing from a superior source.

He would proceed to state the reasons which induced him to be of this opinion: it is
declared in the Constitution, that neither House, during the session of Congress, shall,
without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any place
than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting; from hence he inferred, that the two
Houses, by a concurrence, could adjourn for more than three days, and to any other
place which they thought proper; by the other clause he had mentioned, the Executive
power is restrained from any interference with the Legislative on this subject; hence,
he concluded, it would be dangerous to attempt to give to the President a power which
the Constitution expressly denied him. He did not suppose that the attempt to vest the
Executive with a power over the adjournment of the Legislature would absolutely
convey the power, but he conceived it wrong to make the experiment. He submitted it
to those gentlemen who were attached to the success of the bill, how far an
unconstitutional declaration may impede its passage through the other branch of the
Legislature.

It has been supposed by some, that the seat of Government may be at a place different
from that where the Congress sits; and, although the former may be established by
law, the Legislature might remove elsewhere; he could not subscribe to this doctrine.
What is the Government of the United States for which a seat is to be provided? Will
not the Government necessarily comprehend the Congress as a part? In arbitrary
Governments, the residence of the monarch may be styled the seat of Government,
because he is within himself the supreme Legislative, Executive, and Judicial power;
the same may be said of the residence of a limited monarchy, where the efficiency of
the Executive operates, in a great degree, to the exclusion of the Legislative authority;
but in such a Government as ours, according to the legal and common acceptation of
the term, Government must include the Legislative power; so the term
Administration, which in other countries is specially appropriated to the Executive
branch of Government, is used here for both the Executive and Legislative branches;
we, in official communications, say Legislative Administration or Executive
Administration, according as the one or the other is employed in the exercise of its
Constitutional powers. He mentioned these circumstances to show that they ought not
to look for the meaning of terms used in the laws and Constitution of the United
States, into the acceptation of them in other countries, whose situation and
Government were different from that of United America. If his reasoning was just, he
should conclude that the seat of Government would be at that place where both the
Executive and Legislative bodies are fixed; and this depended upon the vote of the
two branches of the Legislature. There was another clause favorable to this opinion; it
was, that giving Congress authority to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases
whatsoever over such district as may, by cession of particular States, and the
acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the Government of the United States; this
was the only place where any thing respecting the seat of Government was
mentioned; and would any gentleman contend that Congress might have a seat of
Government over which they are empowered to exercise exclusive legislation, and yet
reside at the distance of two or 300 miles from it? Such a construction would
contradict the plain and evident meaning of the Constitution, and as such was
inadmissible.

He hoped these observations would be attended to; and did not doubt but if seen in
their true light they would induce the House to reject that part of the bill which he
moved to have struck out.1

SEPTEMBER 28. LOCATION OF THE CAPITAL.

Mr. Madison contended that the amendment proposed by the Senate was a departure
from every principle adopted by the House; but he would not trouble them with a
recapitulation of arguments, which he feared would be unavailing; he wished,
however, that the House would provide against one inconvenience, which was, to
prevent the district in Pennsylvania, chosen by Congress, from being deprived for a
time of the benefit of the laws. This, he apprehended, would be the case, unless
Congress made provision for the operation of the laws of Pennsylvania, in the act by
which they accepted of the cession of that State; for the State relinquished the right of
legislation from the moment that Congress accepted of the district. The propriety of
this proposition was so apparent, that he had not a doubt but the House would consent
to it. He then moved the following proviso: “And provided, that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to affect the operation of the laws of Pennsylvania,
within the district ceded and accepted, until Congress shall otherwise provide by
law.”1