THE WRITINGS OF JAMES MADISON.

SPEECHES IN THE FIRST CONGRESS—SECOND
SESSION, 1790 (Continued).

MAY 14—DISCRIMINATING TONNAGE DUES.1

Mr. Madison replied to the several arguments against his motion. A gentleman, said
he, (Mr. Sedgwick,) had called it a “measure of passion.” He observed that it had
neither been dictated by passion, nor supported with passion; he considered it as a
cool as well as a proper measure, and believed that the more coolly it was examined,
the more proper it would appear. If any thing more were to be done, let it be
something that will be effectual.

As to the distinction proposed between nations in treaty and not in treaty, that point
had been discussed and decided yesterday, and was no part of the argument to-day. It
was agreed on all hands, that the measure reported by the committee was levelled
against a particular nation, though it was not named. Why then ostensibly involve
other nations for whom it was not intended; and by making no difference in favor of
those in treaty, teach others to consider a treaty with us as of no value? He said, we
were the less restrained from making the distinction, because the nation against which
the measures were designed to operate, had not hesitated to set the example, as far as
her supposed interest went. He had before shown, that the principle on which the trade
with the West Indies was regulated by Great Britain, was a departure from the
principle of her navigation act: according to that act, all other nations were allowed to
carry directly their own produce in their own vessels, wherever the same trade was
allowed by the act to British vessels. A gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
Fitzsimons) was afraid the measure was too bold a one. But why was it too bold, if, as
the weighty information and arguments of the gentleman himself had shown, there
was no danger? If the existence of the West Indies, and the prosperity of Great Britain
depended so materially on the trade with the United States, that it would be madness
in her to hazard an interruption of it?

Mr. M. then proceeded to review the European and West India commerce of the
United States. He stated the imports to be, from Europe, about £3,039,000; from the
West Indies, £927,438: total, £3,966,438. The exports to Europe, £3,203,448; to the
West Indies, £941,552: total, £4,244,000.

He stated the export and return freight to Europe to be estimated at £500,000; to the
West Indies, £250,000: total, £750,000. For the return freight, which was estimated at
one-tenth of the export freight, he deducted £45,454 10s., which left for the value of
the export freight to Europe £454,545 10s. By applying a like rule to the West India
freight, he made the total export freight to amount to £681,818 5s.; of this he
computed two-thirds, or £454,545 10s., to be enjoyed by British vessels. He took


notice here, that the proportion of foreign to British tonnage, employed in the exports
of Great Britain, was stated by Lord Sheffield as no more than one to twelve.

The amount of the freight, at two pounds sterling per ton, employs 227,272 tons of
shipping; or, allowing two voyages a year, 568 vessels of 200 tons burden each.

The shipping, allowing six men to 100 tons, employs 6,816 seamen; or allowing one
man to fifteen tons, which was perhaps a better estimate, 7,575 seamen.

He asked whether it was conceivable that Great Britain would give up all these
advantages, rather than put the commerce of the two countries on such a footing as
would be reasonable and reciprocal? Whether she would throw away, and into her
rival’s hands too, a freight of near half a million sterling? Whether she could bear to
see between five and six hundred vessels rotting in port, or sold to others to be
employed in the business, sacrificed by her? He asked what would become of seven
or eight thousand seamen, thus turned out of employment? And whether they would
not enter into the service of other nations, and particularly of the United States, to be
employed in the exportation of our produce?

He took notice of the immense loss that would be sustained by the British merchants
on the capital employed in the American trade, particularly the rice and tobacco. Near
one hundred thousand hogshead of tobacco, not more than ten or twelve thousand of
which were consumed in Great Britain, annually went almost all through their hands.
The same thing might be said of one hundred thousand barrels of rice annually
exported from the United States.

The manufacturers, he said, would be still more distressed by the want of the
American market. Many articles, which were luxuries to this country, and which it
would be better without, gave bread to that class of people. Their distresses would
increase the spirit of emigration, already so much dreaded by the policy of that nation.
He observed, that Great Britain would be the more unwilling to risk an interruption of
her trade to the United States, because it would hasten the establishment of American
manufactures, which she had always endeavored to prevent, and thereby cut off
forever this important market for her. Such a danger would be particularly alarming,
as her three great staple manufactures, of leather, iron, and wool, were those which
were making the greatest progress in this country, and would be the most aided at her
expense.

As to the British West Indies, it had been fully shown that they could neither prosper
nor subsist without the market of the United States; they were fed from our granaries.
Without our lumber, which, it was admitted, could be supplied no where else, they
could not carry on their trade, or support their establishments. In the sale of their rum,
on which the profits of their labor essentially depended, they had no resource but in
the consumption of this country. He said, the whole amount of rum sent to other
foreign countries did not exceed eight or nine hundred thousand gallons, which was
not more than one-fifth of what was imported into the United States; besides their loss
in this respect, they would have the mortification to see the vacancy in our market
filled by rum made from molasses supplied by rival islands. In case of war, which


happened every ten or twelve years, or a season of famine, which happened every
three or four, he said the condition of the British islands must evidently be such, that
she could not fail to provide against the contingency by proper concessions, unless
she should infer from our conduct that they are not necessary.

He added, as a consideration which he thought of great weight, in favor of the
measure, that in case any negotiations should take place it would put our Executive on
proper ground. At present the trade with Great Britain was precisely in that situation
which her interest required, and her King could moreover regulate it according to
circumstances. On our part, the Executive could neither offer nor withdraw anything.
He could offer nothing, because Great Britain was already in possession of every
commercial privilege she desired. He could not say, give us reciprocal privileges, or
yours shall be withdrawn, because this must be done by a legislative act. By passing
the act proposed, the Executive will be enabled to speak a language proper for the
occasion. He can say, if you do not give the United States proper privileges, those
given to you shall not be continued.1

JULY 6—LOCATION OF THE CAPITAL.

Mr. Madison.—In order to decide this question rightly, we ought to compare the
advantages and disadvantages of the two places as they relate to the good of the
United States. Now, I will defy any gentleman, however sanguine he may be with
respect to Baltimore, to point out any substantial advantage that is not common to the
Potomac; and I defy him to disprove that there are not several important advantages
belonging to the Potomac, which do not appertain to Baltimore. The committee have
had ample information with respect to the Northern and Southern positions of the two
places. In point of salubrity of air, without disparaging the pretensions of Baltimore,
the Potomac is at least equally favored in that respect. In regard to centrality of
situation, the Potomac has undoubtedly the advantage. In respect to security from
invasion, I aver the Potomac has the advantage also. With relation to the Western
country, there is not a shadow of comparison. If we should go as far south as
Baltimore, why not an equal distance southwest to the Potomac? Those who are
acquainted with the country on the Potomac, and that in the neighborhood of
Baltimore, do not hesitate to give the preference to the Potomac. It is true, that
Baltimore has respectable resources; her rapid growth is a clear proof of it; but look at
the resources of the Potomac, the great range of rich country that borders on it, and
see if these are not advantages that must, in a short time, produce a commercial town.
Sir, a period might be named, not exceeding ten years, within which the town of
Baltimore obtained the greater part of its increase and consequence; a period of ten
years will produce the same effects on the Potomac, because the same causes exist;
and when, super-added to this, the residence of Government shall be there, there can
be no doubt but that there will be every accommodation that can be desired.

It is said, that before the ten years expire, a repeal of the act may take place, and thus
Congress be kept at Philadelphia. But what more can we do than pass a law for the
purpose? It is not in our power to guard against a repeal. Our acts are not like those of
the Medes and Persians, unalterable. A repeal is a thing against which no provision
can be made. If that is an objection, it holds good against any law that can be passed.


If those States that may have a superiority in Congress at a future day will pay no
respect to the acts of their predecessors, or to the public good, there is no power to
compel them.

But I flatter myself that some respect will be paid to the public interest, and to the
plighted faith of the Government. As to centrality, the best evidence we have at this
time in favor of the Potomac is the different travelling of the members; and this, sir,
proves incontestably that the proposed place on the Potomac is near the centre. If any
arguments could be brought against it, it is its being too far to the Northward, for the
mileage south of the Potomac is twelve thousand seven hundred and eighty-two miles,
to the north of it twelve thousand four hundred and twenty-two miles. If to this Rhode
Island be added, it will not be more than equal. If the bill once passes, I am not under
any apprehensions of a repeal; but if danger of repeal does exist, it is of that kind
against which we cannot guard. Sir, we should calculate on accepting the bill as it
now stands; we ought not to risk it by making any amendment. We have it now in our
power to procure a Southern position. The opportunity may not again speedily present
itself. We know the various and jealous interests that exist on this subject. We should
hazard nothing. If the Potomac is struck out, are you sure of getting Baltimore? May
no other place be proposed? Instead of Baltimore, is it not probable we may have
Susquehanna inserted, perhaps the Delaware? Make any amendment, sir, and the bill
will go back to the Senate. Are we sure that it will come back into our possession
again? By amending, we give up a certainty for an uncertainty. In my opinion, we
shall act wisely, if we accept the bill as it now stands, and I beg leave to press it on
gentlemen not to consent to any alteration, lest it be wholly defeated and the prospect
of obtaining a Southern position vanish for ever.1