SPEECHES IN THE FIRST CONGRESS—SECOND
SESSION, 1790.

FEBRUARY 3. NATURALIZATION OF ALIENS1

When we are considering the advantages that may result from an easy mode of
naturalization, we ought also to consider the cautions necessary to guard against
abuses. It is no doubt very desirable that we should hold out as many inducements as
possible for the worthy part of mankind to come and settle amongst us, and throw
their fortunes into a common lot with ours. But why is this desirable? Not merely to
swell the catalogue of people. No, sir, it is to increase the wealth and strength of the
community; and those who acquire the rights of citizenship, without adding to the
strength or wealth of the community, are not the people we are in want of. And what
is proposed by the amendment is, that they shall take nothing more than an oath of
fidelity, and declare their intention to reside in the United States. Under such terms, it
was well observed by my colleague, aliens might acquire the right of citizenship, and
return to the country from which they came, and evade the laws intended to encourage
the commerce and industry of the real citizens and inhabitants of America, enjoying at
the same time all the advantages of citizens and aliens.

I should be exceedingly sorry, sir, that our rule of naturalization excluded a single
person of good fame that really meant to incorporate himself into our society; on the
other hand, I do not wish that any man should acquire the privilege, but such as would
be a real addition to the wealth or strength of the United States.

It may be a question of some nicety, how far we can make our law to admit an alien to
the right of citizenship, step by step; but there is no doubt we may, and ought to
require residence as an essential.1

FEBRUARY 11. PUBLIC DEBT1

No gentleman, Mr. Chairman, has expressed more strongly than I feel, the importance
and difficulty of the subject before us. Although I have endeavored to view it under
all its aspects, and analyze it in all its principles, yet have I kept my mind open, and
been anxious to aid my own reflections by the reflected light to be expected from
gentlemen on this floor who enter into the discussion. For this purpose, I have chosen
hitherto rather to be a hearer than a speaker on the subject, and should even at this
moment have continued in my seat, but that the turn which the business has taken,
renders it requisite for me now, if at all, to trouble the committee with my reflections,
and the opinion in which they have terminated.

It has been said, by some gentlemen, that the debt itself does not exist in the extent
and form which is generally supposed. I confess, sir, I differ altogether from the
gentlemen who take that ground. Let us consider, first, by whom the debt was
contracted, and then let us consider to whom it is due. The debt was contracted by the
United States, who, with respect to that particular transaction, were in a national
capacity. The Government was nothing more than the agent or organ, by which the
whole body of the people acted. The change in the Government which has taken place
has enlarged its national capacity, but it has not varied the national obligation, with
respect to the engagements entered into by that transaction. For, in like manner, the
present Government is nothing more than the organ, or agent, of the public. The
obligation which they are under, is precisely the same with that under which the debt
was contracted; although the Government has been changed, the nation remains the
same. There is no change in our political duty, nor in the moral or political obligation.
The language I now use, sir, is the language of the Constitution itself; it declares that
all debts shall have the same validity against the United States, under the new, as
under the old form of Government. The obligation remains the same, though I hope
experience will prove that the ability has been favorably varied.

The next question is, to what amount the public are at present indebted? I conceive the
question may be answered in a few words. The United States owe the value they
received, which they acknowledge, and which they have promised to pay: what is that
value? It is a certain sum in principal, bearing an interest of six per cent. No logic, no
magic, in my opinion, can diminish the force of the obligation.

The only point on which we can deliberate is, to whom the payment is really due; for
this purpose, it will be proper to take notice of the several descriptions of people who
are creditors of the Union, and lay down some principles respecting them, which may
lead us to a just and equitable decision. As there is a small part of the debt yet
unliquidated, it may be well to pass it by and come to the great mass of the liquidated
debt. It may here be proper to notice four classes into which it may be divided:

First. Original creditors, who have never alienated their securities.

Second. Original creditors who have alienated.

Third. Present holders of alienated securities.

Fourth. Intermediate holders, through whose hands securities have circulated.

The only principles that can govern the decision on their respective pretensions, I take
to be, 1. Public Justice; 2. Public Faith; 3. Public Credit; 4. Public Opinion.

With respect to the first class, there can be no difficulty. Justice is in their favor, for
they have advanced the value which they claim; public faith is in their favor, for the
written promise is in their hands; respect for public credit is in their favor, for if
claims so sacred are violated, all confidence must be at an end; public opinion is in
their favor, for every honest citizen cannot but be their advocate.

With respect to the last class, the intermediate holders, their pretensions, if they have
any; will lead us into a labyrinth, for which it is impossible to find a clew. This will be
the less complained of, because this class were perfectly free, both in becoming and
ceasing to be creditors; and because, in general, they must have gained by their
speculations.
The only rival pretensions then are those of the original creditors, who have assigned,
and of the present holders of the assignments.

The former may appeal to justice, because the value of the money, the service, or the
property advanced by them, has never been really paid to them.

They may appeal to good faith, because the value stipulated and expected, is not
satisfied by the steps taken by the Government. The certificates put into the hands of
the creditors, on closing their settlements with the public, were of less real value than
was acknowledged to be due; they may be considered as having been forced, in fact,
on the receivers. They cannot, therefore, be fairly adjudged an extinguishment of the
debt. They may appeal to the motives for establishing public credit, for which justice
and faith form the natural foundation. They may appeal to the precedent furnished by
the compensation allowed to the army during the late war, for the depreciation of
bills, which nominally discharged the debts. They may appeal to humanity, for the
sufferings of the military part of the creditors can never be forgotten, while sympathy
is an American virtue. To say nothing of the singular hardship, in so many mouths, of
requiring those who have lost four-fifths or seven-eighths of their due, to contribute
the remainder in favor of those who have gained in the contrary proportion.

On the other hand, the holders by assignment, have claims, which I by no means wish
to depreciate. They will say, that whatever pretensions others may have against the
public, these cannot effect the validity of theirs. That if they gain by the risk taken
upon themselves, it is but the just reward of that risk. That as they hold the public
promise, they have an undeniable demand on the public faith. That the best
foundation of public credit is that adherence to literal engagements on which it has
been erected by the most flourishing nations. That if the new Government should
swerve from so essential a principle, it will be regarded by all the world as inheriting
the infirmities of the old. Such being the interfering claims on the public, one of three
things must be done; either pay both, reject wholly one or the other, or make a
composition between them on some principle of equity. To pay both is perhaps
beyond the public ability; and as it would far exceed the value received by the public,
it will not be expected by the world, nor even by the creditors themselves. To reject
wholly the claims of either is equally inadmissible; such a sacrifice of those who
possess the written engagements would be fatal to the proposed establishment of
public credit; it would moreover punish those who had put their trust in the public
promises and resources. To make the other class the sole victims is an idea at which
human nature recoils.

A composition, then, is the only expedient that remains; let it be a liberal one in favor
of the present holders, let them have the highest price which has prevailed in the
market; and let the residue belong to the original sufferers. This will not do perfect
justice; but it will do more real justice, and perform more of the public faith, than any
other expedient proposed. The present holders, where they have purchased at the
lowest price of the securities, will have a profit that cannot reasonably be complained
of; where they have purchased at a higher price, the profit will be considerable; and
even the few who have purchased at the highest price cannot well be losers, with a
well funded interest of six per cent. The original sufferers will not be fully
indemnified; but they will receive, from their country, a tribute due to their merits,
which, if it does not entirely heal their wounds, will assuage the pain of them. I am
aware, that many plausible objections will lie against what I have suggested, some of
which I foresee and will take some notice of. It will be said, that the plan is
impracticable; should this be demonstrated, I am ready to renounce it; but it does not
appear to me in that light. I acknowledge that such a scale as has often been a subject
of conversation, is impracticable.

The discrimination proposed by me, requires nothing more than a knowledge of the
present holders, which will be shown by the certificates; and of the original holders,
which the office documents will show. It may be objected, that if the Government is
to go beyond the literal into the equitable claims against the United States, it ought to
go back to every case where injustice has been done. To this the answer is obvious:
the case in question is not only different from others in point of magnitude and of
practicability, but forces itself on the attention of the committee, as necessarily
involved in the business before them. It may be objected, that public credit will suffer,
especially abroad; I think this danger will be effectually obviated by the honesty and
disinterestedness of the Government displayed in the measure, by a continuance of the
punctual discharge of foreign interest, by the full provision to be made for the whole
foreign debt, and the equal punctuality I hope to see in the future payments on the
domestic debts. I trust also, that all future loans will be founded on a previous
establishment of adequate funds; and that a situation, like the present, will be thereby
rendered impossible.

I cannot but regard the present case as so extraordinary, in many respects, that the
ordinary maxims are not strictly applicable to it. The fluctuations of stock in Europe,
so often referred to, have no comparison with those in the United States. The former
never exceeded 50, 60, or 70 per cent: can it be said, that because a Government
thought this evil insufficient to justify an interference, it would view in the same light
a fluctuation amounting to seven or eight hundred per cent.?

I am of opinion, that were Great Britain, Holland, or any other country, to fund its
debts precisely in the same situation as the American debt, some equitable
interference of the Government would take place. The South Sea scheme, in which a
change, amounting to one thousand per cent. happened in the value of stock, is well
known to have produced an interference, and without any injury whatever to the
subsequent credit of the nation. It is true, that in many respects, the case differed from
that of the United States; but, in other respects, there is a degree of similitude, which
warrants the conjecture. It may be objected, that such a provision as I propose will
exceed the public ability: I do not think the public unable to discharge honorably all
its engagements, or that it will be unwilling, if the appropriations shall be satisfactory.
I regret, as much as any member, the unavoidable weight and duration of the burdens
to be imposed; having never been a proselyte to the doctrine, that public debts are
public benefits. I consider them, on the contrary, as evils which ought to be removed
as fast as honor and justice will permit, and shall heartily join in the means necessary
for that purpose. I conclude with declaring, as my opinion, that if any case were to
happen among individuals, bearing an analogy to that of the public, a Court of Equity
would interpose for its redress; or that if a tribunal existed on earth, by which nations
could be compelled to do right, the United States would be compelled to do
something not dissimilar in its principles to what I have contended for.

FEBRUARY 18. PUBLIC DEBT

Mr. Madison said, that the opponents of his proposition had imposed on its friends not
only a heavy task, by the number of their objections, but a delicate one by the nature
of some of them. It had been arraigned as an embarrassing measure which ought to be
facilitated, and producing discussions which might end in disagreeable consequences.
However painful it might be to contradict the wishes of gentlemen whom he
respected, he could promise nothing more in the present case than his endeavors to
disappoint their apprehensions. When his judgment could not yield to the propositions
of others, the right to make and support his own, was a right which he could never
suffer to be contested. In exercising it, he should study to maintain that moderation
and liberality which were due to the greatness of the subject before the committee. He
felt pleasure in acknowledging that the like spirit had, in general, directed the
arguments on the other side. Free discussions, thus conducted, are not only favorable
to a right decision, but to a cheerful acquiescence of the mistaken opponents of it.
They might have the further advantage of recommending the results to the public, by
fully explaining the grounds of it. If the pretensions of a numerous and meritorious
class of citizens be not well founded, or cannot be complied with, let them see that
this is the case, and be soothed, under their disappointment, with the proof that they
have not been overlooked by their country.

He would proceed now to review the grounds on which the proposition had been
combated; which he should do without either following those who had wandered from
the field of fair argument, or avoiding those who had kept within its limits.

It could not have escaped the committee, that the gentlemen to whom he was opposed,
had reasoned on this momentous question as on an ordinary case in a Court of Law;
that they had equally strained all the maxims that could favor the purchasing, or be
adverse to the original holder; and that they had dwelt with equal pleasure on every
circumstance which could brighten the pretensions of the former, or discredit those of
the latter. He had not himself attempted, nor did he mean to undervalue the
pretensions of the actual holders. In stating them, he had even used as strong terms as
they themselves could have dictated; but beyond a certain point he could not go. He
must renounce every sentiment which he had hitherto cherished, before his
complaisance could admit that America ought to erect the monuments of her
gratitude, not to those who saved her liberties, but to those who had enriched
themselves in her funds.

All that he wished was, that the claims of the original holders, not less than those of
the actual holders, should be fairly examined and justly decided. They had been
invalidated by nothing yet urged. A debt was fairly contracted; according to justice
and good faith, it ought to have been paid in gold or silver; a piece of paper only was
substituted. Was this paper equal in value to gold or silver? No. It was worth, in the
market, which the argument for the purchasing holders makes the criterion, no more
than one-eighth or one-seventh of that value. Was this depreciated paper freely
accepted? No. The Government offered that or nothing. The relation of the individual
to the Government, and the circumstances of the offer, rendered the acceptance a
forced, not a free one. The same degree of constraint would vitiate a transaction
between man and man before any Court of Equity on the face of the earth. There are
even cases where consent cannot be pretended; where the property of the planter or
farmer had been taken at the point of the bayonet, and a certificate presented in the
same manner. But why did the creditors part with their acknowledgment of the debt?
In some instances, from necessity; in others, from a well-founded distrust of the
public. Whether from the one or the other, they had been injured; they had suffered
loss, through the default of the debtor; and the debtor cannot, in justice or honor, take
advantage of the default.

Here, then, was a debt acknowledged to have been once due, and which was never
discharged; because the payment was forced and defective. The balance,
consequently, is still due, and is of as sacred a nature as the claims of the purchasing
holder can be; and if both are not to be paid in the whole, is equally entitled to
payment in part. He begged gentlemen would not yield too readily to the artificial
niceties of forensic reasoning; that they would consider not the form, but the
substance—not the letter, but the equity—not the bark, but the pith of the business. It
was a great and an extraordinary case; it ought to be decided on the great and
fundamental principles of justice. He had been animadverted upon for appealing to
the heart as well as the head: he would be bold, nevertheless, to repeat, that, in great
and unusual questions of morality, the heart is the best judge.

It had been said, by a member from Massachusetts, that the proposition was founded
on a new principle in Congress. If the present Congress be meant, that is not strange,
for Congress itself is new; if the former Congress be meant, it is not true, for the
principle is found in an act which had been already cited. After the pay of the army
had, during the war, been nominally and legally discharged in depreciated paper, the
loss was made up to sufferers.

It had been said, by a member from New York, that this case was not parallel, there
being no third party like the present holders of certificates. This objection could not
be valid. The Government paid ten dollars worth in fact, but only one to the soldier.
The soldier was then the original holder. The soldier assigned it to the citizen; the
citizen then became the actual holder. What was the event? The loss of the original
holder was repaired, after the actual holder had been settled with, according to the
highest market value of his paper.

He did not mean, however, to decide on the whole merits of this last transaction; or to
contend for a similitude, in all respects, between the two kinds of paper. One material
difference was, that the bills of credit, by more frequent transfers, and by dividing the
change of value among a greater number of hands, rendered the effect of less
consequence to individuals, and less sensible to the public mind. But this difference,
whatever force it might give to the claims of the purchasing holder of certificates,
could diminish nothing from the claims of the original holders who assigned them.
It had been said, by another member from Massachusetts, that the old Government did
every thing in its power. It made requisitions, used exhortations, and in every respect
discharged its duty; but it was to be remembered, that the debt was not due from the
Government, but the United States. An attorney, with full powers to form, without the
means to fulfil engagements, could never, by his ineffectual though honest efforts,
exonerate his principal.

He had been repeatedly reminded of the address of Congress in 1783, which rejected
a discrimination between original and purchasing holders. At that period, the
certificates to the army, and citizens at large, had not been issued. The transfers were
confined to loan-office certificates, were not numerous, and had been, in great part,
made with little loss to the original creditor. At present, the transfers extend to a vast
proportion of the whole debt, and the loss to the original holders has been immense.
The injustice which has taken place has been enormous and flagrant, and makes
redress a great national object. This change of circumstances destroys the argument
from the act of Congress referred to; but if implicit regard is to be paid to the
doctrines of that act, any modification of the interest of the debt will be as
inadmissible as a modification of the principal.

It had been said, that if the losses of the original creditors are entitled to reparation,
Congress ought to repair those suffered from paper money—from the ravages of war,
and from the act of barring claims not produced within a limited time. As to the paper
money, either the case is applicable, or it is not; if not applicable, the argument fails;
if applicable, either the depreciated certificates ought to be liquidated by a like scale,
as was applied to the depreciated money; or the money, even if the whole mass of it
was still in circulation, ought now to be literally redeemed, like the certificates.
Leaving the gentleman to make his own choice of these dilemmas, he would only add,
himself, that if there were no other difference between the cases, the manifest
impossibility of redressing the one, and the practicability of redressing the other, was
a sufficient answer to the objection. With respect to the towns burnt, and other
devastations of war, it was taught, by the writers on the law of nations, that they were
to be numbered among the inevitable calamities of mankind. Still, however, a
Government owed them every alleviation which it could conveniently afford; but no
authority could be found that puts on the same footing with those calamities, such as
proceed from a failure to fulfil the direct and express obligations of the public. The
just claims barred by the act of limitation, were, in his opinion, clearly entitled to
redress. That act was highly objectionable. The public, which was interested in
shortening the term, undertook to decide, that no claim, however just, should be
admitted, if not presented within nine months. The act made none of the exceptions
usual in such acts, not even in favor of the most distant parts of the Union. In many
instances, it had been absolutely impossible for the persons injured to know of the
regulation. Some of these instances were within his own knowledge. To limit the
duration of a law to a period, within which it could not possibly be promulgated, and
then take advantage of the impossibility, would be imitating the Roman tyrant, who
posted up his edicts so high that they could not be read, and then punished the people
for not obeying them.
It has been said that if the purchased certificates were funded at the rate proposed,
they would fall in the market, and the holders be injured. It was pretty certain, that the
greater part, at least, would be gainers. He believed that the highest market price,
especially with the arrears of interest incorporated, well funded at six per cent. would
prevent every loss that could justify complaint.

But foreigners had become purchasers, and ought to be particularly respected.
Foreigners, he remarked, had themselves made a difference between the value of the
foreign and domestic debt; they would, therefore, the less complain of a difference
made by Government here. It was his opinion that the terms stated in the proposition
would yield a greater profit to the foreign purchasers than they could have got for
their money if advanced by them in any of the funds of Europe.

The proposition had been charged with robbing one set of men to pay another. If there
were robbery in the case, it had been committed on the original creditors. But, to
speak more accurately, as well as more moderately, the proposition would do no more
than withhold a part from each of two creditors, where both were not to be paid the
whole.

A member from New York has asked, whether an original creditor, who had assigned
his certificate, could, in conscience, accept a reimbursement in the manner proposed?
He would not deny that assignments might have been made with such explanations, or
under such circumstances, as would have that effect; but, in general, the assignments
have been made with reference merely to the market value, and the uncertainty of the
steps that might be taken by the Government. The bulk of the creditors had assigned
under circumstances from which no scruple could arise. In all cases where a scruple
existed, the benefit of the provision might be renounced. He would, in turn, ask the
gentleman, whether there was not more room to apprehend that the present holder,
who had got his certificate of a distressed and meritorious fellow-citizen for one-
eighth, or one-tenth its ultimate value, might not feel some remorse in retaining so
unconscionable an advantage?

Similar propositions, it was said, had been made and rejected in the State Legislatures.
This was not a fact. The propositions made in the State Legislatures were not intended
to do justice to the injured, but to seize a profit to the public.

But no petitions for redress had come from the sufferers. Was merit, then, to be the
less regarded, because it was modest? Perhaps, however, another explanation ought to
be given. Many of the sufferers were poor and uninformed. Those of another
description were so dispersed, that their interests and efforts could not be brought
forward. The case of the purchasing holders was very different.

The Constitutionality of the proposition had been drawn into question. He asked
whether words could be devised that would place the new Government more precisely
in the same relation to the real creditors with the old? The power was the same; the
obligation was the same. The means only were varied.
An objection had been drawn from the article prohibiting ex post facto laws. But as ex
post facto laws relate to criminal, not civil cases, the Constitution itself requires this
definition, by adding to a like restriction on the States an express one against
retrospective laws of a civil nature.

It had been said that foreigners had been led to purchase, by their faith in the article of
the Constitution, relating to the public debts. He would answer this objection by a
single fact: Foreigners had shown, by the market price in Europe, that they trusted the
nature of foreign debt more under the old Government, than the nature of the
domestic debt under the new Government.

Objections to the measure had been drawn from its supposed tendency to impede
public credit. He thought it, on the contrary, perfectly consistent with the
establishment of public credit. It was in vain to say, that Government ought never to
revise measures once decided. Great caution on this head ought, no doubt, to be
observed. but there were situations in which, without some Legislative interposition,
the first principles of justice, and the very ends of civil society, would be frustrated.
The gentlemen themselves had been compelled to make exceptions to the general
doctrine: they would probably make more before the business was at an end.

It had been urged, that if Government should interpose in the present case, as
interposition would be authorized in any case whatever where the stock might
fluctuate, the principle would apply as well to a fall of sixty or seventy per cent. as to
a fall of six hundred or seven hundred per cent. He could not admit this inference. A
distinction was essential between an extreme case, and a case short of it. The line was
difficult to be drawn; but it was no more incumbent on him than on his opponents to
draw it. They themselves could not deny that a certain extremity of the evil would
have justified the interposition. Suppose that the distress of the alienating creditors
had been ten times as great as it was; that instead of two, three, or four shillings in the
pound, they had received a farthing only in the pound; and that the certificates lay
now in the hands of the purchasers in that state, or even at a less value, was there a
member who would rise up and say, that the purchasers ought to be paid the entire
nominal sum, and the original sufferer be entitled to no indemnification whatever?

Gentlemen had triumphed in the want of a precedent to the measure. No Government,
it was said, had interposed to redress fluctuations in its public paper. But where was
the Government that had funded its debts under the circumstances of the American
debt? If no government had done so, there could be no precedent either for or against
the measure, because the occasion itself was unprecedented. And if no similar
occasion had before existed in any country, the precedent to be set would at least be
harmless, because no similar occasion would be likely to happen in this.

If gentlemen persisted, however, in demanding precedents, he was happy in being
able to gratify them with two, which, though not exactly parallel, were, on that
account, of the greater force, since the interposition of Government had taken place
where the emergency could less require them.
The first was the case of the Canada bills. During the war which ended in 1763, and
which was attended with a revolution of the Government in Canada, the supplies
obtained for the French army in that province were paid for in bills of exchange and
certificates. This paper depreciated, and was bought up chiefly by British merchants.
The sum and the depreciation were so considerable as to become a subject of
negotiation between France and Great Britain at the peace. The negotiations produced
a particular article, by which it was agreed by France that the paper ought to be
redeemed, and admitted by Great Britain that it should be redeemed at a liquidated
value. In the year 1766 this article was accordingly carried into effect by Ministers
from the two Courts, which reduced the paper in the hands of the British holders, in
some instances, as much as seventy-five per cent. below its nominal value. It was
stated, indeed, by the reporter of the case, that the holders of the paper had themselves
concurred in the liquidation; but it was not probable that the concurrence was
voluntary. If it was voluntary, it shows that they themselves were sensible of the
equity of the sacrifice.

The other case was of still greater weight, as it had no relation to war or treaty, and
took place in the nation which has been held up as a model with respect to public
credit. In the year 1713, the civil list of Great Britain had fallen into arrears to the
amount of £500,000. The creditors who had furnished supplies to the Government,
had, instead of money, received debentures only from the respective officers. These
had depreciated. In that state, they were assigned in some instances; in others,
covenanted to be assigned. When the Parliament appropriated funds for satisfying
these arrears, they inserted an express provision in the act, that the creditors who had
been obliged, by the default of Government, to dispose of their paper at a loss, might
redeem it from the assignees by repaying the actual price, with an interest of six per
cent., and that all agreements and covenants to assign should be absolutely void. Here
then was an interposition on the very principle, that a Government ought to redress
the wrongs, sustained by its default, and on an occasion trivial when compared to that
under consideration; yet it does not appear that the public credit of the nation was
injured by it.

The best source of confidence in Government was the apparent honesty of its views.
The proposition could not possibly be ascribed to any other motive than this, because
the public was not to gain a farthing by it. The next source was an experienced
punctuality in the payments due from the Government. For this support to public
credit, he relied on what had been experienced by a part of the foreign creditors; on
the provision to be made for the residue; and on the punctuality which, he flattered
himself, would be observed in all future payments of the domestic creditors. He was
more apprehensive of injury to public credit from such modifications of the interest of
the public debt as some gentlemen seemed to have in view. In these the public would
be the gainer, and the plea of inability the more alarming, because it was so easy to set
up, so difficult to be disproved, and for which, consequently, the temptations would
be so alluring

The impracticability of the measure was the remaining ground on which it had been
attacked. He did not deny that it would be attended with difficulties, and that perfect
justice would not be done. But these were not the questions. It was sufficient that a
grievous injustice would be lessened, and that the difficulties might be surmounted.
What he had in view was, that for the conveniency of claimants some authority should
be provided, and properly distributed through the Union, in order to investigate and
ascertain the claims; and that, for the security of the public, the burden of proof
should be thrown on the claimants. A scrutiny on this plan, aided by original
settlements in the books of the army department, and the State commissioners, and
other office documents, would be a remedy, at once, for all the difficulties stated with
regard to fictitious names, certificates issued as money by commissaries and
quartermasters, due bills, &c.

For some particular cases, special provisions might be requisite. The case of loan-
office certificates, alienated at early periods, before they were much depreciated, fell
under this description. Legacies might be another. He would have no objection to
some special regulation, as to the payments of debts in certificates to persons within
the British lines, said to have been authorized by the laws of New York; though he
presumed few such payments had been made, and that of this few the greater part had,
by this time, passed from the creditors into other hands. There might be a few other
cases equally entitled to some particular attention in the details of the provision. As to
the merchants who had compounded for their debts in certificates, or persons who had
exchanged bonds for them, it could not be doubted that the transactions had reference
to the market value of the paper, and therefore had nothing peculiar in them.

The expense incident to such a plan of investigation ought to form no difficulty. It
bears no proportion to the expense already incurred by commissioners, &c., for
effecting a less proportion of justice. Rather than justice should not be done, the
expense might be taken out of the portion to the original sufferers.

The danger of frauds and perjuries had been worked up into a formidable objection. If
these had always been equally alarming, no provision could ever have been made for
the settlement or discharge of public debts. He reminded the committee of the frauds
and perjuries for which a door had been opened by the final settlements, &c., of the
frauds and perjuries inseparable from the collection of imposts and excises; yet these
were all submitted to as necessary evils, because justice could not be done without
them. The frauds and perjuries incident to this supplementary provision for justice
must be very inconsiderable in number; and still more so, when compared either with
the object to be obtained, or with the like evils already encountered in pursuit of a like
object.

Great ingenuity and information had been exerted by the gentlemen on the other side
in raising difficulties. He was sure that, after an adoption of the proposition, the same
exertion would be used in removing them, and with such aid, the idea of
impracticability would vanish.

FEBRUARY 24. ASSUMPTION OF STATE DEBTS

Mr. Madison observed on the measure, that the principle of it is in favor of the United
States, so far as it may tend to bring about a final settlement and payment of all the
accounts between the United States and the individual States. I believe this to be,
however, a work of amazing difficulty, though not absolutely impossible. If it should
be accomplished, it must go at least hand in hand with the Secretary’s plan; and if it
can be accomplished, it will do more honor to the revolution in our Government than
almost any other measure.

I acknowledge that I cannot subscribe to all the reasons which some gentlemen urge. I
am far from thinking that the assumption of the State debts will be the means of
keeping the debts dispersed throughout the States. The assumption of those debts will
give them, immediately, the character of debts of the United States; they will be
embarked in the same bottom; they will take the same course, and, of consequence,
will arrive at the same place where it is acknowledged the domestic debts of the
United States, by degrees, have assembled. Whether they will remain in this place, or
flow out of the United States altogether, is a question which time will decide. I look
for such a revolution of the debt as will place the greatest part of it in foreign hands.

Neither do I subscribe to the opinion of the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. Stone)
that the United States can raise more revenue by the exercise of a sole authority, than
by the concurrent operation of the General and State Governments. There are, I
conceive, objects of taxation of three kinds: The first is that which can only be
operated upon by the United States; the second, which can be operated upon by the
United States and individual States jointly; and, in the last place, such as can be best
operated upon by the individual States only.

An impost or excise can be best regulated by the sole authority of the United States.
Some taxes can be collected by the two Governments, without any interference: the
land tax generally falls under this description; but in some particular cases, the local
authority alone can make the proper provision. I conclude, therefore, that the authority
of the United States and individual States, taken together, will draw more revenue
than either can separately draw from the same sources.

But if we can accomplish the great object of doing full justice in so complicated a
case, perhaps it will reward us for all the difficulties and sacrifices we shall be
compelled to make; but, in order to accomplish it, we must go much further than the
object of the proposition on the table.

Some gentlemen have made the passage of this resolution a condition of providing for
the acknowledged debt of the United States. I think this a preposterous condition, and
a language improper to be held, after the decision which has taken place. In priority of
time and obligation, we ought to provide for the acknowledged debt. Before we
determine to enter into a new obligation, we should see how far we are able to
discharge those positively due by us. The connexion between these resolutions is not
such as to require or justify the condition. The plan of the Secretary draws a
distinction between the two debts.

If we are to make a common stock of the debts of the States, not yet discharged, it can
only be justified by securing provision for those which are discharged; with this view,
therefore I will now move to add to the resolution these words: “that effectual
provision be, at the same time made for liquidating and crediting to the States, the
whole of their expenditure during the war, as the same hath been or may be stated for
the purpose: and, in such liquidation, the best evidence shall be received that the
nature of the case will permit.”

It may be said, that this is a superfluous condition; because there is a Board in
existence charged with the trust; but, sir, their power does not reach the great object
contemplated. The limitation act has already barred a great number of equitable
claims of one State; perhaps there are other States in the same predicament. I do not
know whether the power of the Board has a latitude sufficient to receive such
evidence as the nature of the case will permit; and if adequate provision is not made
on this head, a great deal more injustice will be done than by a refusal to assum the
State debts.1

I hope I shall be excused for connecting these provisions; because I think it
impossible to separate them, in justice or propriety. If, by providing for the first, we
can secure a provision for the last, we may do great honor to the councils of America,
and establish its character for equity and justice. If we do not wish to decide
precipitately on the question, I shall be content to delay it; and perhaps gentlemen
may be impressed with the propriety of doing so till they take a view of the funds
which are in contemplation, and see how effective and adequate they are likely to
prove.