SPEECH IN THE VIRGINIA HOUSE OF DELEGATES AGAINST PAPER MONEY
James Madison
November 1786

Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, vol. 2 (1783-1787), pp. 187-188

---

SPEECH IN THE VIRGINIA HOUSE OF DELEGATES,
NOVEMBER, 1786, AGAINST PAPER MONEY.

Unequal to Specie. 1. being redeble at future day and not bearing interest. 2. illustrated by [obliterated] of Bank notes—Stock in
funds—paper of Spain issued during late war [see Neckar on finance]. Navy
bills—tallies. 3. being of less use than specie which answers externally as well as
internally—must be of value which depends on the use.

Unjust. 1. to creditors if a legal tender. 2 to debtors if not legal tender, by increasing
difficulty of getting specie. This it does by increasing extravagance & unfavourable
balance of trade—& by destroying that confidence between man & man, by which
resources of one may be coanded by another. Illustrated 1 by raising denomination of
coin 2. increasing alloy of do. brass made as silver by the Romans according to
Sallust. 3 by changing weights & measures. 4. by case of creditors within who are
debtors without the State.

Unconstitutional 1. Affects rights of property as much as taking away equal value in
land; illustrd. by case of land pd. for down & to be conveyd. in future, & of a law
permitting conveyance to be satisfied by conveying a part only—or other land of
inferior quality—2. affects property without trial by Jury.

Antifederal. Right of regulating coin given to Congs. for two reasons. 1. for sake of
uniformity. 2. to prevent fraud in States towards each other or foreigners. Both these
reasons hold equally as to paper money.

Uñecessary. 1. produce of country will bring in specie, if not laid out in superfluities.
2. Of paper, if necessary, eno’ already in Tobo. notes, & public securities—3. the true
mode of giving value to these, and bringing in specie is to enforce Justice & taxes.

Pernicious. 1. by fostering luxury, extends instead of curing scarcity of specie—2. by
disabling compliance with requisition of Congs. 3. serving dissentions between States.
4. destroyg. confidence between individuals. 5. discouraging coerce—6 enrichg.
collectors & sharpers—7. vitiating morals. 8. reversing end of Govt. which is to
reward best & punish worst. 9. conspiring with other States to disgrace Republican
Govts. in the eyes of mankind.

Objection. paper money good before the War.

Answr. 1. not true in N. Engd. nor in Va. where exchange rose to 60 per ct. nor in
Maryd. see Franklyn on paper money 2. confidence then not now. 3. principles of
paper credit not then understood. Such wd. not then nor now succeed in Great Britain
&c.
