AN EXAMINATION OF THE BRITISH DOCTRINE,
WHICH SUBJECTS TO CAPTURE A NEUTRAL TRADE,
NOT OPEN IN TIME OF PEACE

James Madison (1806)
Secretary of State

Source: The Writings of James Madison, ed. Gaillard Hunt, Vol. 7 (1803-1807)
New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1908. Pages 204-372 (PDF pages 139-233).

---

In times of peace among all nations, their commercial intercourse is under no other
restrictions than what may be imposed by their respective laws, or their mutual
compacts. No one or more nations can justly control the commerce between any two
or more of the others.

When war happens between any two or more nations, a question arises, in what
respect it can affect the commerce of nations not engaged in the war?

Between the nations not engaged in the war, it is evident that the commerce cannot be
affected at all by a war between others.

As a nation not engaged in the war remains in the same relations of amity and of
commercial pursuits, with each of the belligerent nations, as existed prior to the war,
it would seem that the war could not affect the intercourse between the neutral and
either of the belligerent nations; and that the neutral nation might treat and trade with
either, or both the belligerent nations, with the same freedom as if no war had arisen
between them. This, as the general rule, is sufficiently established.

But inasmuch as the trade of a neutral nation with a belligerent nation might, in
certain special cases, affect the safety of its antagonist, usage, founded on the
principal of necessity, has admitted a few exceptions to the general rule.

Thus, all instruments of war, going into the hands of one belligerent nation, may be
intercepted, on the high seas, by its adversary.

In like manner, a neutral trade with a place actually besieged is liable to be interrupted
by the besiegers.

It is maintained also on one side, though strongly contested on the other, that the
property of a nation at war, in a neutral ship, may be seized and condemned by the
enemy of that nation.

To these exceptions, Great Britain has undertaken to add another, as important as it is
new. She asserts a right to intercept the trade of neutrals with her enemies, in all
cases, where the trade, as it respects the ship, the cargo, or even the individual port of
destination, was not as free before the war, as it is made during the war.

In applying this doctrine, the British government and courts have not, as yet, extended
it beyond the trade of neutrals on the coasts, and with the colonies of enemies. But it
is manifest, that this limitation is founded in considerations of expediency only; and


that the doctrine is necessarily applicable to every other branch of neutral commerce
with a belligerent nation, which was not open to the same nation in time of peace. It
might indeed with equal reason be extended farther. It might be applied to the case of
a trade legally permitted to foreign nations in time of peace, but not actually carried
on by them in time of peace; because in time of peace actually carried on by the
nation itself; and which is taken up by foreign nations in time of war only, in
consequence of the war, which, by increasing the risk or by finding other employment
for the vessels and seamen of the nation itself, invites neutral traders into the deserted
channels. In both cases, the neutral intervention may be said to result from the
pressure of the war; and in both cases, the effect is the same to the belligerent; since in
both, neutrals carry on for him, a trade auxiliary to his prosperity and his revenue,
which he could no longer carry on for himself; and which at the same time, by
liberating his naval faculties for the purposes of war, enables him to carry on the war,
with more vigor and effect. These inferences cannot be impaired by any sound
distinction, between a trade of foreigners with colonies, and a trade of foreigners with
the ports of the mother country. Colonies, more especially when they are altogether
subject to the same authority which governs the parent state, are integral parts of the
same dominion or empire. A trade, therefore, between a colonial port and a port of the
parent or principal State, is precisely of the same nature with a trade between one and
another port of the latter: and a trade between a colony and a foreign port is, in like
manner, precisely the same with the trade between a foreign port and the parent
country; which is only a more considerable, as a colony may be a less considerable,
part of the same country or empire. Previous to the late political union of Ireland with
Great Britain, the relation between those two islands was strictly analogous to the
relation between Great Britain and the West Indies. Was any difference ever
entertained between a coasting trade from a British to a British port, and a trade from
a British to an Irish port? or between a trade from a foreign port to an Irish port, and a
trade from a foreign to a British port? In the nature of things, and in the eye of foreign
nations, the cases were the same. If any difference existed, it was merely
circumstantial, such as may be incident to all cases essentially the same; or merely
municipal, such as may result from those regulations of trade, which all sovereigns
have an acknowledged right to make. It would not be unfair, therefore, in examining
the doctrine asserted by Great Britain, to view it in the whole extent of which it is
susceptible. But the latitude in which it is avowed, and carried into operation,
sufficiently demands the serious attention of all nations; but more than any, that of the
United States, whose commerce more than any is the victim to this belligerent
pretension. To prepare the way for this examination, several remarks are to be
premised.

First. The general rule being, that the trade between a neutral and belligerent nation is
as free as if the latter were at peace with all nations, and the cases in which it is not as
free being exceptions to the general rule, the exceptions, according to a received
maxim of interpretation, are to be taken strictly, against those claiming the benefit of
the exceptions, and favorably for those claiming the benefit of the general rule.

Secondly. The exceptions being founded on a principle of necessity, in opposition to
ordinary right, the necessity ought to be evident and urgent. In proportion as the


necessity may be doubtful, and still more, in proportion as the sacrifice of neutral
interests would exceed the advantage to the belligerent, the exception fails.

Thirdly. The progress of the law of nations, under the influence of science and
humanity, is mitigating the evils of war, and diminishing the motives to it, by favoring
the rights of those remaining at peace, rather than of those who enter into war. Not
only are the laws of war tempered between the parties at war, but much also in
relation to those at peace.

Repeating then, that every belligerent right to controul neutral commerce must, as an
exception to the general freedom of commerce, be positively and strictly proved, and
the more strictly, as the exceptions are in a course of restriction rather than extension,
the question is ready for examination, whether it be a part of the law of nations, that a
trade ordinarily shut in time of peace, and opened to neutrals in time of war, on
account of the war, is liable, as much as a trade in contraband of war or with a
blockaded port, to capture and condemnation.

It will not be overlooked, that the principle, as thus laid down, does not extend to any
of the cases, where a new trade, though opened during a war, is not opened on
account of the war, but on considerations which would produce the same measure, if
no war existed: from which follows another important observation, that taking into
view the probable occurrence of such considerations, the still greater probability of a
mixture of such with considerations derived from the war, the impossibility of
distinguishing the proportion of these different ingredients in the mixture, with the
evident disadvantage of rendering more complicated, instead of simplifying, a rule of
conduct between independent nations, to be expounded and enforced by one of the
parties themselves, it would seem to require no great effort of candor, to acknowledge
the powerful objection in practice, to such a principle, were it really embraced by the
most specious theory.

But without dwelling on this view of the subject, however just in itself, the principle
in question will be tried:

First—by the writings most generally received as the depositaries and oracles of the
law of nations;

Secondly—by the evidence of treaties;

Thirdly—by the judgment of nations, other than Great Britain;

Fourthly—by the conduct of Great Britain herself;

Fifthly—by the reasoning employed in favor of the principle.

First. The written authorities on this subject.

It cannot be necessary to examine the historical fragments which have been gleaned
by modern authors, as evidence of the usage and tenets of the civilized nations of
antiquity. The great change which has taken place in the state of manners, in the


maxims of war, and in the course of commerce, make it pretty certain, that either
nothing would be found relating to the question, or nothing sufficiently applicable, to
deserve attention in deciding it. There is but little hazard in saying, that in none of the
learned collections, is a single fact presented, which countenances the British
pretension; or even shews, that a single ancient nation asserted or acted on it.

On a cursory review of the naval laws of Rhodes, of Oleron, of Wisbuy, and of the
Hanse Towns, they appear to be perfectly barren of information. They are confined to
subjects within the law-merchant, taking no notice of questions between nations; and
are no further binding on particular nations, than [as] they may be respectively
adopted into their municipal codes.

The ancient compilation under the title of Consolato del Mare, a work of great
authority with British jurists, has two chapters which treat particularly of captures and
recaptures. They do not, however, touch any cases but those where either the ship or
the cargo, in whole or in part, might be enemy’s property; and consequently are
inapplicable to the case under examination.*

Descending to more modern times, the first authority which offers itself, is the work
of Albericus Gentilis.

He was the immediate precursor of Grotius, and has the merit of preparing the way for
the great work supplied by the genius and erudition of the latter. Gentilis being so
soon eclipsed by a superior authority, is but little known beyond a few occasional
citations, which, as far as they may not coincide with the doctrines of Grotius, are, for
the most part, superseded by them.

Grotius is not unjustly considered, as in some respects, the father of the modern code
of nations. Great, however, as his authority deservedly may be, it yields, in a variety
of instances, to that of later jurists; who, to all the lights furnished by this luminary,
have added those derived from their own sources, and from the improvements made
in the intercourse and happiness of nations.

On the relations between belligerent and neutral nations, Grotius has but a single, and
that a short chapter, (B. III, Ch. 17,) with three short sections, Ch. 1, sec. 5, of the
same book with a note, and B. II, Ch. 2, sec. 10, and B. III, Ch. 6, sec. 6, with a note.*
The chapter begins with following paragraph:

“It may seem needless for us to treat of those that are not engaged in war, when it is
manifest that the right of war cannot affect them: but because upon occasion of war,
many things are done against them on pretence of necessity; it may be proper here
briefly to repeat what we have already mentioned† before, that the necessity must be
really extreme, to give any right to another’s goods: that it is requisite that the
proprietor be not himself in the like necessity. When real necessity urges us to take,
we should then take no more than what it requires; that is, if the bare keeping of it be
enough, we ought to leave the use of it to the proprietor; and if the use be necessary,
we ought not to consume it; and if we cannot help consuming it, we ought to return
the full value of it.”


Having illustrated this exemption of neutral property from the effect of war between
others, with the sole exception of cases of extreme necessity, by a train of examples,
he proceeds to lay down the duty of neutrals towards the belligerent parties, as
follows:

“On the other side it is the duty of those who are not engaged in the war, to sit still
and do nothing that may strengthen him that prosecutes an ill cause or to hinder the
motions of him that hath justice on his side, as we have said before. [Ch. 1, of this B.,
sec. 5.] But in a dubious cause to behave themselves alike to both parties; as in
suffering them to pass through their country, in supplying them with provisions, and
in not relieving the besieged.” In illustration of the impartiality here enjoined, a
number of instances are specified in the sequel of the chapter and the notes.

The 5th section of chapter 1, above referred to, makes up the whole of what Grotius
teaches on this branch of the subject. As it is more definite and particular than the
other extracts, the insertion of it, though of greater length, will be proper.

* “Here also there uses to arise another question, what we may lawfully do to those
who are not our enemies, nor are willing to be thought so, and yet supply our enemies
with certain things. There have been formerly, and still are great disputes about this
matter, some contending for the rigors [* of the laws] of war, and others for a freedom
of commerce.

“But first we must distinguish between the things themselves. For there are some
things which are of use only in war, as arms, &c. Some that are of no use in war, as
those that serve only for pleasure; and lastly, there are some things that are useful both
in peace and war, as money, provisions, ships, and naval stores. Concerning the first
(things useful only in war) it is true what Amalasuintha said to the Emperor Justinian,
he is to be reputed as siding with the enemy, who supplies him with things necessary
for war. As to the second sort of things [for pleasure only, of which sort he gives
examples from Seneca] there is no just cause of complaint.

“As to the third sort of things, that are useful at all times, we must distinguish the
present state of the war. For if I cannot defend myself without interrupting those things
that are sent to my enemy, necessity† (as I said before) will give me a good right to
them, but upon condition of restitution, unless I have just cause to the contrary. But if
the supply sent hinder the execution of my designs, and the sender might have known
as much; as if I have besieged a town or blocked up a port, and thereupon I quickly
expect a surrender, or a peace, that sender is obliged to make me satisfaction for the
damage that I suffer upon his account, as much as he that shall take a prisoner out of
custody that was committed for a just debt, or helps him to make his escape, in order
to cheat me; and proportionably to my loss I may seize on his goods and take them as
my own, for recovering what he owes me. If he did not actually do me any damage,
but only designed it, then have, a right by detaining those supplies, to oblige him to
give me security for the future, by pledges, hostages, or the like. But further, if the
wrongs, done to me by the enemy, be openly unjust, and he, by those supplies, puts
him in a condition to maintain his unjust war, then shall he not only be obliged to
repair my loss, but also be treated as a criminal, as one that rescues a notorious


convict out of the hands of justice; and in this case it shall be lawful for me to deal
with him agreeably to his offence, according to those rules which we have set down
for punishments; and for that purpose I may deprive him even of his goods.”

The following extracts explain the principles of Grotius on the cases, where the
property of an enemy is found in a neutral ship, or neutral property in a belligerent
ship.

In a note to B. III, Ch. 1, sec. 5, Grotius cites the Consolato del Mare for the doctrine
that enemy’s property might be taken in neutral ships, but that the ship of an enemy
did not affect the neutral cargo, nor the cargo of an enemy, the neutral ship. The
residue of this long note recites and disapproves the attempts of Great Britain, France
and other nations, to prohibit altogether the trade of neutrals with their enemies.

* B. III, Ch. 6, sec. 6: “Wherefore the common saying that goods found in our
enemies’ ships are reputed theirs, is not so to be understood, as if it were a constant
and invariable law of the right of nations; but a maxim, the sense of which amounts
only to this, that it is commonly presumed, in such a case, the whole belongs to one
and the same master; a presumption, however, which, by evident proofs to the
contrary, may be taken off. And so it was formerly adjudged in Holland, in a full
assembly of the sovereign court during the war with the Hanse Towns in 1338, and
from thence hath passed into a law.”

In a note to this section, Grotius adds:† “Neither do the ships of friends become
lawful prize on the account of the enemies’ goods; unless it is done by the consent of
the owner of the ship;” referring in this case to the authority of several writers, and the
practice of several nations.

The spirit of these passages, taken altogether, can leave no doubt, as to the side on
which the authority of Grotius is to be placed.

In the first place he expressly limits the general right of war against the property of
neutrals, to cases of that evident and extreme necessity, which must always make a
law for itself whenever it exists, but which can never be applied to the cases falling
within the belligerent claim asserted by Great Britain.

In the next place he particularly limits to the case of a necessity of self-defence, the
right of intercepting neutral supplies, even to a blockaded or besieged place; and
makes it a condition, moreover, that a surrender of the place, or a peace, be quickly
expected as the effect of the blockade.

In the third place it is to be observed, that as in these passages, Grotius has taken
express notice of the several questions of contraband, of blockades, and of the
carriage of enemy’s property, which formed all his exceptions to the freedom of
neutral commerce; his silence with respect to the British exception is an abundant
proof, that this last had either never been then asserted, or that he considered it so
manifestly groundless as not to merit notice.


This is, in fact, the material inference to be drawn from the review here taken of this
celebrated jurist: and for the sake of this inference principally, the review has been
made thus full and minute; for it must be admitted, that in general his ideas are much
less precise and satisfactory than those which are to be found in succeeding
authorities. In distinguishing wars, by their justice or injustice, on which neutrals have
no right to decide; in not distinguishing supplies, as they may be sold only or sent; or
as they may be sent by a government, or by private persons; nor sufficiently
distinguishing between the right of a belligerent to prevent supplies by intercepting
them, and the right to do so, by punishing the offenders; he gives a proof that his work
is more to be admired for the novelty and magnitude of the undertaking, than for the
accuracy of its doctrines and definitions.

Pufendorf, who may next be consulted, contents himself with a simple reference to
Grotius on the question—“How they are to be dealt with, who supply the enemy with
what he wants.”

In a note by Barbeyrac on this reference to Grotius, he himself refers to a letter from
Pufendorf to Groningius, as conveying the judgment of Pufendorf with respect to the
question “whether we may hinder neutral nations from trading during the war with the
enemy.” Groningius, it seems, having consulted Pufendorf on a treatise he had
planned upon “free navigation,” received the following answer; which, having
undergone much discussion, and as found in the English translation, seeming to
glance at the British principle of intercepting a commerce opened to neutrals in time
of war, is copied at full length, and receives an attention which would not otherwise
be bestowed on it:

“The work, sir, that you have in view, relating to the liberty of navigation, excites my
curiosity. It is a curious subject, and what no person as yet, that I know of, has
particularly handled. I very much however fear, if I may judge from your letter, that
you will find people who will dispute your notions. The question is, certainly, one of
those which have not yet been settled upon any clear or undeniable principles; so far
as to afford a general rule to mankind. In all the examples brought upon this subject,
there is a mixture of right and fact. Each nation usually allows or forbids the maritime
commerce of neutral people with its enemy, either according as it is its interest to
preserve the friendship of those people, or it finds itself strong enough to obtain from
them what it requires. For example, the English and Dutch may say, without
absurdity, that it is lawful for them to do all the ill they can to the French, with whom
they are at war; and consequently to employ the method the most proper to weaken
them, which is to traverse and ruin their trade. They say it is not reasonable that
neutral nations should enrich themselves at their expence; and by engrossing to
themselves a commerce which the English and Dutch want, furnish the French with
money to continue the war. This seems the rather just, because England and Holland
commonly favor the trade of neutral nations, by suffering them to transport and sell in
foreign markets merchandizes of their own growth and manufacture. In short, they say
that they are willing to leave them the trade they usually carry on in time of peace;
but they cannot see them take advantage of the war, to extend their commerce to the
prejudice of England and Holland. But as this matter of trade and navigation does not
so much depend upon rules founded on a general law, as upon conventions made


between particular nations; so in order to form a solid judgment of the point in
question, we ought previously to examine what treaties subsist between the northern
crowns and England and Holland; and whether these last powers have offered the
former just and reasonable conditions. On the other hand, nevertheless, if the northern
princes can maintain their trade with France, by sending strong convoys with their
fleets, I see nothing to blame in it, provided their vessels do not carry contraband
goods. The laws of humanity and equity between nations do not extend so far as to
require, without any apparent necessity, that one people should give up its profit in
favour of another. But as the avarice of merchants is so great that for the smallest gain
they make no scruple of exceeding the just bounds of commerce; so nations that are at
war may certainly visit neutral ships, and, if they find prohibited goods on board, have
a full right to confiscate them. Besides I am no way surprised that the northern crowns
have a greater regard to the general interest of Europe, than to the complaints of some
greedy merchants who care not how matters go, provided they can satisfy their thirst
of gain. These princes wisely judge that it is not at all convenient for them to take
precipitate measures, while other nations unite all their forces to reduce within bounds
an insolent and exorbitant power, which threatens Europe with slavery, and the
Protesant religion with destruction. This being the interest of the northern crowns, it is
neither just nor necessary, that for a present advantage, they should interrupt so
salutary a design, especially as they are at no expence in the affair and run no hazard,”
&c.

Without knowing more of the plan of “free navigation” espoused by Groningius, it is
not easy to understand precisely the sentiments of Pufendorf on the subject. It
deserves to be remarked, however, that, in the argument on the belligerent side, he
states not what he thought, but what they said. On the neutral side he expresses his
own opinion: “On the other hand, nevertheless, if the northern princes can maintain
their trade by sending strong convoys with their fleets, I see nothing to blame in it,
provided their vessels do not carry contraband goods.”

But what is most material to be observed is, that the expression, “that they (the
belligerent nations) are willing to leave them (the neutrals) the trade they usually
carry on in time of peace: but that they cannot see them take advantage of the war to
extend their commerce to the prejudice of England and Holland,” cannot possibly
refer to the British distinction between a trade usually permitted in peace, and a trade
permitted only in war. Such a construction, by no means countenanced either by the
general tenor of the letter, or the commercial history of the period, is absolutely
precluded by the preceding sentence. “They say, qu’il n’est pas just que les peuples
neutres s’enrichissent à leurs depens, et en attirant â eux un commerce interrompu
pour l’Angleterre et la Holland, fournissent à la France des secours, &c.” The English
translation of this sentence is equivocal, if not false. The true meaning of it is, that it
was not deemed just that neutrals should enrich themselves by entering into a
commerce interrupted, for England and Holland, by the war. The commerce in
question, therefore, was not a commerce opened to neutrals during the war; but a
commerce which England and Holland had carried on with France previous to the
war, which the war had shut against them, and which they did not like to see
transferred to commercial competitors remaining at peace.*


Pufendorf, then, not derogating in this explanation of his sentiments, from his
reference to Grotius for the law of nations concerning neutral rights and duties, but
rather strengthening the neutral rights asserted by Grotius, must be placed in the same
scale in which Grotius has been placed.

Bynkershoeck is the authority next in order of time. He treats the subject of
belligerent and neutral relations with more attention, and explains his ideas with more
precision, than any of his predecessors.

His 9th chapter is professedly on the question,† “what neutrals may or may not do,
during a war between other nations.” After stating, hypothetically, an unlimited claim,
on the neutral side, to trade with belligerents, in every thing, as if there was no war;
rejecting the distinction made by Grotius between a just and unjust war; and urging
the duty of impartiality towards those engaged in it, he proceeds to observe,‡ “that the
enemies of our friends are to be viewed in a two-fold character; either as our friends,
or the enemies of our friends. If you consider them as friends, it would be lawful to
aid them with our counsel, and to succor them with military forces, with arms, and
with all other things whatsoever useful in war. But, inasmuch as they are the enemies
of our friends, that cannot lawfully be done by us; because we should in so doing,
prefer one to another in the war, contrary to the equality of friendship, which is of
primary obligation. It is better to preserve friendship with both, than, by favoring one
in the war, to renounce tacitly the friendship of the other.

“And, indeed, what I have just said is taught not only by reason, but also by the usage
received among almost all nations. For although the commerce with the enemy of our
friends be free, it is agreeable to usage, as in the next chapter I shall shew more at
large, that we should assist neither one nor another, with those things which may
furnish and foment the war against our friends. It is not lawful, therefore, to carry to
either, those things which are needful in making war; as are cannon, arms, and what
are of principal use in war, soldiers; who are also excepted by various treaties
between nations: materials for ships are also sometimes excepted, where an enemy is
in absolute want of them for building ships to be employed against our friends.
Provisions even, are often excepted, when an enemy is pressed by the siege of our
friends, or is otherwise labouring under the want of food. On the best ground,
therefore, are we interdicted to supply any of these things to belligerents; because by
these things we should, in a manner, appear to make war ourselves on our friends. If,
therefore, we consider belligerents, simply, in the light of friends, we may rightfully
carry on commerce with them, and send them merchandises of whatever kind; if we
consider them as the enemies of our friends, merchandizes are to be excepted, which,
in war, might annoy our friends; and this consideration prevails over the former one;
for in whatever manner we succour one against the other, we take part in the war,
which would be incompatible with the preservation of friendship.”

Thus far the doctrine of this jurist cannot be mistaken. He lays it down as a general
rule, that the trade of neutrals with the nations at war, provided it be impartial, is as if
there were no war; but that certain articles, as instruments of war, form an exception
to this general rule; to which he suggests as a further exception, the case of a siege, or
of a similar pressure of famine. It cannot be pretended that there is either a single


general expression, or particular allusion, that can be tortured into an exception of any
trade, merely for the British reason, that it was not open to neutrals before, as well as
during, the war.

The residue of the chapter is chiefly employed in discussing the legality and
construction of treaties of succour and subsidy, between a nation at peace and nations
at war; after which he proceeds to the tenth chapter, in which he treats of the list of
contraband, with several questions incident to it. His doctrine here, the same precisely
as in the preceding chapter, is laid down in the following words:* “The rule,
confirmed almost invariably by treaties is, that neutrals are not to carry contraband
articles to our enemies. If they carry them and are intercepted, they incur a forfeiture.
But with the exception of these articles, they trade freely both backward and forward;
and carry with impunity, all other articles whatever to the enemy.”

That under the term contraband, he could mean to class so vague and novel a
description of trade, as that which distinguishes between commercial regulations, as
existing before the war, and as made in the course of the war, is rendered the more
impossible, by the definition given of contraband:† “Hence by contraband, are to be
understood, things which in their actual state are adapted to war; without considering
whether apart from war, they may also be of use; there being few instruments of war,
which may not be used for other purposes.” For this he gives as a just reason, that‡ “if
you prohibit every material out of which anything may be formed for warlike use,
great would be the catalogue of prohibited articles; since there is scarcely any
material, out of which something at least, adapted to war may not be fabricated.”

In the ensuing chapter, he treats of the case of sieges and blockades, as an exception
to the freedom of neutral character.

In the 11th chapter, he examines the question, “whether the contraband character of a
part of the cargo, can affect the residue of the cargo or the ship;” with several other
questions incident to such mixed cases.

Chapter 13th relates to neutral property in the ships of an enemy; which he exempts
from confiscation. His position son this subject shew how much the turn of his
judgment must have been adverse to any such restrictions on neutral commerce, as
that instituted by Great Britain.* “According to reason, a right of that sort [to
confiscate neutral property in a belligerent vessel] cannot be defended; for why may I
not be allowed to use the ship of my friend, though your enemy, in transporting my
merchandize? When treaties do not prohibit, I have a right, as I said above, to carry on
commerce with your enemy; and if this be lawful, it is also lawful to enter into any
contracts whatever with him; to buy, to sell, to let, to hire, &c. Wherefore, if I shall
have engaged his ship and his service to transport my effects by sea, it was a
transaction on every principle lawful. You, as his enemy, may take his ship; but with
what right can you take what belongs to me, that is, to your friend? If, indeed, I prove
them to be mine; otherwise I agree with Grotius, that there is some room for
presuming things found in the ship of an enemy, to be enemy’s property.”


Finally, in his 14th chapter, he treats the case of enemy’s effects in neutral vessels;
deciding with Grotius and others, that the neutrality of the ship does not protect the
cargo from capture and condemnation. He consequently makes this case also an
exception to the general freedom of neutral commerce, in favor of belligerent
privileges.

From this distinct and full view of the sentiments of Bynkershoeck, it is clear, that the
whole weight of his authority is opposed to the principle advanced by Great Britain.
He is the first writer who seems to have entered into a critical and systematic
exposition of the law of nations, on the subject of maritime commerce between
neutral and belligerent nations; and the plan which he adopted was well calculated to
do justice to the subject. Instead of undertaking, after the example of Grotius and
Pufendorf, an entire code of public law, he selected for a more thorough discussion,
the particular questions which were deemed most important, and most frequent in the
transactions and intercourse of modern nations. Among these, he very properly
classed the question of neutral commerce, and bestowed on it, the formal investigation
which we have seen. He begins with the general question, how far a war between two
nations can affect the rights, particularly the commercial rights, of a nation at peace
with both, deciding in favor of neutral nations, that their commerce remains free as a
general rule; and in favor of belligerent nations, that in certain cases, exceptions to
that general freedom are prescribed by the principle of self-defence. He goes on then
to examine the several cases which had been allowed or claimed, as exceptions. He
establishes the belligerent right to intercept articles on the list of contraband. He
establishes also the right to controul supplies to places besieged or blockaded. He
concurs in the doctrine, that the flag of a friend does not protect the property of an
enemy. He discusses the claim, maintained by some, to confiscate the property of a
friend under the flag of an enemy, which he disproves. He discusses, moreover,
several other minor questions, which were incident to the main subject. He appears, in
short, to have taken a comprehensive view of the commercial relations between
neutral and belligerent nations; and to have omitted no question, belonging to those
relations, which was of sufficient importance to deserve his attention. And yet, it
appears, that he has not even glanced at the question, “whether a neutral commerce, in
articles not contraband, nor going to a besieged or blockaded place, was unlawful, for
the reason that the belligerent party had been induced by the war, to new-model its
commercial regulations.” Does it not necessarily and undeniably follow, either that no
such pretension had, at that period, ever been started, or that it had received no
countenance, which could entitle it to notice? It is impossible to conceive that a
question of such magnitude could be otherwise passed over, by a pen which dwelt
with such minute attention on questions less nearly allied to the main subject.

The authority of Bynkershoeck, in this case, ought to have the greater weight with
Great Britain, because, in other cases, so much weight is claimed for it, by the
champions of her favorite doctrines.

The reputation which Vattel enjoys in Great Britain, greater perhaps than he enjoys
any where else, requires that he should be particularly consulted on this subject. The
work of Vattel unquestionably possesses great merit; not so much, indeed, for the
originality of his plan, or his matter, which he admits to have been derived from Wolf;


as for the agreeable dress which he has given to the dry treatise of his prototype, and
for the liberal spirit which has, in many instances, improved the doctrines of all his
predecessors. Vattel is, however, justly charged with failing too much in the merit of a
careful discrimination; and sometimes with delivering maxims, which he either could
not reconcile, or does not take pains to explain. In the chapter on neutrality (B. III,
Ch. 7,) he might perhaps have been more exact in his definitions, and more lucid in
the order of his ideas. His meaning, nevertheless, is, on the whole, sufficiently clear,
and arranges him beyond all controversy, with Grotius, Pufendorf, and Bynkershoeck,
in opposition to the doctrine under consideration.

As the basis of the true doctrine, on the subject of neutral commerce, he lays down
these principles:

That a neutral nation is bound to an exact impartiality;

That this impartiality relates solely to the war;

That it includes two obligations: the first forbidding succours in troops, not stipulated
before the war, arms, ammunition, or any thing of direct use in the war; the second,
requiring that in whatever does not relate to the war, one of the parties must not be
refused, on account of its present quarrel, what is granted to the other. He observes
“that this does not trespass on the liberty of the neutral nation, in negotiations,
connexions of friendship, or its trade, to govern itself by what is most advantageous to
the State. When this consideration induces it to preferences in things of which every
one has the free disposal, it only makes use of its right, and is not chargeable with
partiality. But to refuse any one of these things, to one of the parties, purely as being
at war with the other, and for favoring the latter, would be departing from an exact
neutrality.”

Having laid this foundation, and recommended to nations, intending, as they have a
right, to remain neutral, that they should secure their neutrality by treaties for the
purpose, he proceeds to state more particularly—

1st. “That whatever a nation does in use of its own rights, and solely with a view to its
own good, without partiality, without a design of favoring one power to the prejudice
of another, cannot, in general, be considered as contrary to neutrality; and becomes
such, only upon particular occasions, when it cannot take place without injury to one
of the parties, who has then a particular right to oppose it. Thus, the besieger has a
right to prohibit access to the place besieged. Exclusively of this kind of cases, the
quarrels of another cannot deprive me of the free disposal of my rights in the pursuit
of measures which I judge advantageous to my country.” Hence he infers a right to
permit, in certain cases, levies of troops to one of the parties, and to deny it to the
other, where there may be good reason for the distinction; and where it is the custom,
as among the Swiss, to grant levies; and, consequently, where the custom would of
itself be a proof that the grant was not the effect of partiality in relation to the war. He
asserts, in like manner, for the sovereign, as well as private citizens, in the habit of
lending money at interest, the right to lend it to one of the parties at war, “who may
possess their confidence, without lending it to the other;” observing, that “whilst it


appears that this nation lends out its money purposely for improving it by interest, it is
at liberty to dispose of it according to its own discretion, and I have no reason to
complain. But if the loan be manifestly for enabling the enemy to attack me, this
would be concurring in the war against me.” He applies the same remark to the case
of troops furnished to an enemy, by the State itself, at its own expence; and of money
lent without interest: adding, at the same time, as a further instance of neutral rights,
that if a nation trades in arms, timber, ships, military stores, &c., I cannot take it amiss
that it sells such things to my enemy, provided it does not refuse to sell them to me
also. It carries on its trade without any design of injuring me, and in continuing it, the
same as if I was not engaged in war, that nation gives me no just cause of complaint.

Making, thus, impartiality the test of lawfulness in the conduct of neutrals, and the
mere pursuit of their own interest, without a design to injure any of the belligerents,
the test of impartiality, he enters more particularly on the discussion of the active
trade which neutral nations carry on with those at war.

“It is certain,” he says, “that, as they [neutrals] have no part in my quarrel, they are
under no obligation to abandon their trade that they may avoid furnishing my enemy
with the means of making war. Should they make it a point* not to sell to me any of
these articles, whilst they take measures for transporting great quantities of them to
my enemy, with a manifest intention of favouring him, such a partiality would
exclude them from the neutrality they enjoyed. But if they simply pursue their
commerce* [suivre tout uniment leur commerce] they do not thereby declare
themselves against my interest; they only exercise a right, which they are under no
obligation of sacrificing to me.”

The general freedom of neutral commerce, being thus asserted, the writer goes on to
lay down the exceptions which war makes to it.

“On the other hand, whenever I am at war with a nation, both my safety and welfare
prompt me to deprive it as much as possible of every thing which may enable it to
resist or hurt me. Here the law of necessity shews its force. If this law warrants me on
occasion to seize what belongs to another, shall it not likewise warrant me to stop
every thing relative to war, which neutral nations are carrying to my enemy? Even if I
should, by taking such measures, render all these neutral nations my enemies, I had
better run the hazard than suffer him who is actually at war to be thus freely supplied
to the great increase of his power. It is therefore very proper and very suitable to the
law of nations which disapproves of multiplying the causes of war, not to consider
those seizures of the goods of neutral nations as acts of hostility. When I have notified
to them my declaration of war against such or such a people, if they will afterwards
run the risk of supplying them with things relative to war, let them not complain if
their goods fall into my hands, for I do not declare war against them, because they
attempted to carry such goods. They suffer indeed by a war in which they have no
concern, but it is accidentally. I do not oppose their right, I only make use of my own,
and if our rights clash, and reciprocally injure each other, it flows from the effect of
inevitable necessity,” &c.


“But that limits may be set to these inconveniences; that the commerce of neutral
nations may subsist in all the freedom which the laws of war will admit, there are
rules to be observed, and on which Europe seems to be generally agreed.”

What are the rules which fix these limits?

“The first is carefully to distinguish common goods which have no relation to war,
from those peculiarly subservient to it. In the trade of the former neutral nations are to
enjoy an entire liberty, the parties at war cannot with any reason deny it, or hinder the
importation of such goods into the enemy’s country,” &c. He observes that the good
she referred to, as having relation to war, are those called contraband, of which he
gives a description; proceeding thence to shew how far they are subject to
confiscation, and to infer from the right of confiscation the right of search on the high
seas.

He next mentions, as a limit to the freedom of neutral commerce, that the effects of an
enemy found in a neutral ship are subject to capture; deciding otherwise as to neutral
effects on board an enemy’s ship, which some nations had been in the practice of
capturing.

He specifies, as his last limit or exception to the general freedom of neutral
commerce, the belligerent right to prohibit all commerce with a place besieged or
blockaded; closing the discussion of this particular subject with an emphatic
deduction in these words—“A neutral nation continues with the two parties at war, in
the several relations which nature has placed between nations. It is ready to perform
towards them both all the duties of humanity reciprocally due from nation to nation. It
is in every thing not directly relating to war to give them all the assistance in its
power, and of which they may stand in need. But this assistance is to be given with
impartiality, that is, in not refusing to one of the parties any thing on account of his
being at war with the other. This does not hinder a neutral State having particular
connections of friendship and good neighborhood with one of the parties at war, from
granting him in whatever does not relate to military transactions the preference due to
friends: much more may he without giving offence continue to him, for instance in
commerce, such indulgencies as have been stipulated in their treaties, &c.”

We see then that the authority of Vattel coincides perfectly with the preceding
authorities, more especially that of Bynkershoeck, in establishing the general freedom
of neutral commerce, with the exception of things relating to the war, and in limiting
this exception to the several cases of supplying the enemy with military contraband,
of trading with places besieged or blockaded, and of carrying enemy’s property.

Perhaps this author, not remarkable as already intimated for well-defined ideas, has in
no particular branch of his work left less room for mistaking or perverting his
meaning.

It would be improper not to add Martens to the authorities, who ought to be heard on
this question. Martens was a professor of law in a Hanoverian University, with a
salary from the King of Great Britain as Elector of Hanover, and has distinguished


himself by several publications, which demonstrate his critical judgment of the law of
nations, and the extent of his researches in order to verify and elucidate it. His
summary of this law is a work which was received by the public with a due portion of
that respect which constituted his predecessors authentic depositaries and expositors
of the code, by which the society of nations ought to be governed. We find him
accordingly on the same shelf already with Grotius, Pufendorf, Bynkershoeck, and
Vattel. In Great Britain indeed, notwithstanding his being a subject of her sovereign,
and a professor under his patronage, the doctrine he teaches on the question whether
free ships make free cargoes, has drawn on him the censure of the zealous advocates
for the side taken by Great Britain on that question. In opposing, however, a favorite
doctrine of that nation, under the relation in which he stood to it, he gave a proof of
integrity and independence, which justly inspire the greater esteem for his character,
at the same time that they give the greater weight to his opinions. Even there,
however, his censors have done justice to his eminent talents, and been ready to avail
themselves of his authority, in cases where it supported British principles and
interests.

On the present subject the authority of Martens is clear and full.

He first speaks of neutral commerce according to the universal law of nations, and
next of the modern law of nations with respect to neutral commerce, and its freedom,
as acknowledged by the powers of Europe.

The first he lays down as follows: “The right that a nation enjoys in time of peace of
selling and carrying all sorts of merchandize to every nation who chooses to trade
with it, it enjoys also in time of war, provided that it remains neuter.” He admits at the
same time that necessity may authorize a power at war to hinder the conveyance of
warlike stores to its enemies, so far as to sequester them till the end of the war, or to
take them at their full value for his own use.* He admits again that the power at war
may prohibit all commerce with such places “as he is able to keep so blocked up as to
prevent any foreigner from entering.” But he maintains that “since a belligerent power
cannot exercise hostilities in a neutral place, nor confiscate property belonging to
neutral subjects, such power ought not to confiscate the goods of an enemy found in a
neutral vessel navigating on a free or neutral sea, nor neutral goods found in the vessel
of an enemy: provided, however, in both cases that these goods are not warlike
stores.”

In explaining what he styles the modern law of nations with respect to neutral
commerce, and its liberty as acknowledged by the powers of Europe, he states it “as
generally acknowledged that a neutral power ought not to transport to either of the
belligerent powers merchandizes unequivocally intended for warlike purposes, that
treaties have at some times swelled out this list with articles not evidently and
unequivocally intended for such purposes; at others have expressly declared these not
to be contraband, and that this last ought to be presumed to be the case between
powers having no treaties on the subject.”

“With respect to merchandizes which are not contraband” he says, “it is generally
acknowledged by the powers of Europe, that neutral powers have a right to transport


them to the enemy,*except it be to places blockaded, with which all commerce is
prohibited.”

These two exceptions, namely contraband of war, and the case of blockaded or
besieged places, are the only ones which he allows against the freedom of neutral
commerce. For with respect to enemy’s property in neutral ships, he considers the
new principle which identifies the cargo with the vessel, and thereby avoids the
disputes and embarrassments arising from the old principle, as having been
sufficiently established to take the place of the old one in the law of nations.

The authority of Martens, then, unequivocally and undeniably concurs with that of his
great predecessors, in deciding that the commerce between neutral and belligerent
nations, with a very few exceptions, is entirely free, and that these exceptions do not
include any such pretension as that of Great Britain, to prohibit a trade otherwise
lawful, merely because it might have been laid open to neutrals in consequence of the
war.

It would have been easy to add to the authorities here selected, other respectable
jurists within the same period; as well as a phalanx of authorities of later date, both in
the South and the North of Europe; but the testimony of Grotius, of Pufendorf, of
Bynkershoeck, of Vattel, and of Martens, is more than sufficient for the occasion.
They are the luminaries and oracles, to whom the appeal is generally made by nations,
who prefer an appeal to law, rather than to power; an appeal which is made by no
nation more readily than by Great Britain, when she has sufficient confidence in the
justice of her cause.

Two feeble objections may be thought to claim attention, on this branch of the
investigation.

First. In describing the general freedom of neutral commerce with a nation at war, the
writers who have been reviewed, being strangers to the distinction now introduced
between the legal regulations of the latter in time of war, and those in time of peace,
have sometimes used expressions, which, though they do not favor, do not necessarily
exclude, such a distinction. Thus Bynkershoeck, speaking of the neutral trade of the
Belgians with the French, who were at war with the Spaniards, says that it was of
right, as free as before the war.* The freedom of neutral commerce is laid down, in
similar phrases, by other jurists, both before and after Bynkershoeck. Many of the
more modern writers, not apprized of the misconstruction which might be attempted
on their phraseology, have also described the general freedom of neutral commerce in
time of war, by a reference to the freedom which it enjoyed in time of peace.

The obvious and decisive answer to these criticisms is, that the freedom of commerce
between two nations in time of peace does not refer to the actual footing on which it
happened to be placed by the mutual regulations of the parties, a continuance of
which would, on a subject so fluctuating as that of commerce be often inconvenient,
sometimes absurd; but to the right which the parties have to regulate their commerce,
from time to time, as their mutual interest may suggest, or, to adopt the language of
Vattel, to the relations in which nature has placed independent nations.


This construction is not only the most obvious and rational in itself, but is enforced by
several additional reflections.

It is most consistent, and sometimes alone consistent, with other passages in the same
authors. An example may be seen in Bynkershoeck, Lib. I, Ch. 9, where the
expressions “ut ante bellum constabat,” and “ut cum pax esset inter eos, &c.,” are
evidently meant to comprehend every right, as well as the existing state of commerce
between the neutral and belligerent parties, previous to the war.

As there is no evidence that the distinction was known in the dates of the elder
writers, it would be absurd to suppose them alluding to a state of things which had
never existed; rather than to a state of things which was familiar in practice. And with
respect to the more modern writers, to most of whom the distinction appears to have
been equally unknown, the absurdity of the supposition is doubled by its
inconsistency with the whole tenor and complexion of their doctrines and reasonings
in behalf of neutral rights. Many of them are, in fact, champions for the principles of
the armed neutrality; one of which is, that neutrals may trade freely with, and between
any of, the ports of an enemy not blockaded.

Finally—As all the writers on the general subject of neutral commerce, discuss the
several other exceptions to its rights, which have, at any time, been claimed by
belligerent nations, it would be absurd to suppose that an exception, more extensive
than any of them, should be pretermitted. Their silence alone, therefore, is an
unanswerable proof, that the exception now contended for, could not be known, or
could not be recognized by those writers.

A second objection may be that the practice of opening colonies to neutral trade, had
not been introduced, at the dates of these publications, particularly the more early of
them.

The fact on which this objection relies, might be disproved by a mass of historical
testimony. Two authorities will be sufficient: the first shewing that Spain, represented
as the most rigid in her colonial monopoly, began to relax it as early as 1669, even
during peace: the second, that France had adopted the same policy, in time of war, as
early as the year 1705.

The first is from Long’s History of Jamaica, vol. 1, p. 598.

“In 1669, Spain, for want of ships and sailors of her own, began openly to hire Dutch
shipping to sail to the Indies, though formerly so careful to exclude all foreigners
from thence. And so great was the supply of Dutch manufactures to Spain, &c., that
all the merchandize brought from the Spanish West Indies was not sufficient to make
returns for them; so that the Dutch carried home the balance in money.” The date of
this Spanish relaxation of the colonial monopoly was prior to the work of Pufendorf,
which was published in 1672; and two-thirds of the century prior to that of
Bynkershoeck, which was published in 1737; and which entered so systematically
into the question of neutral rights of commerce.


The other will be found in a Note of Robinson, in his Appendix to Vol. 4, page 17, of
his Admiralty Reports. It is there stated, with his authority for the fact, that about the
year 1705, it being then a time of war, friendly nations were admitted into the trade of
the French colonies, as a better mode of supplying their wants, and getting away their
productions, than that of convoys. It is added, that the first vessels thus introduced
having been captured, the French minister returned to the old, as the only efficacious,
expedient.

The reporter would conclude, from the capture of the neutral vessels, that a neutral
trade with colonies was then held to be illegal. But it would be manifestly wrong to
resort to an explanation not warranted by any ideas otherwise known to exist at that
period; especially when it is so easy to suppose that the capture was directed against
the French property on board the neutral vessels. That the property was French is the
more to be presumed, as the Dutch, the only nation whose capital might have
neutralized the property, were parties to the war. Had they indeed been neutral, their
treaties with Great Britain would have protected the trade in their vessels, on the two-
fold ground that it was lawful to trade, without restriction, with and between the ports
of an enemy; and that the freedom of the ship protected the cargo. The true inference
on the subject is, that the neutral carriers were Danes, or of some other nation who
had no such treaties with Great Britain, and whose capitals did not neutralize the
cargoes of French produce.


TREATIES.*

All writers on the law of nations, as well didactic as polemic, avail themselves,
whenever they can, of the authority of Treaties.

Treaties may be considered under several relations to the law of nations, according to
the several questions to be decided by them.

They may be considered as simply repeating or affirming the general law: they may
be considered as making exceptions to the general law, which are to be a particular
law between the parties themselves: they may be considered as explanatory of the law
of nations, on points where its meaning is otherwise obscure or unsettled; in which
case they are, first, a law between the parties themselves, and next, a sanction to the
general law, according to the reasonableness of the explanation and the number and
character of the parties to it: lastly, Treaties may be considered as constituting a
voluntary or positive law of nations.

Whether the stipulations in a treaty are to be considered as an affirmance, or an
exception, or an explanation, may sometimes appear on the face of the treaty:
sometimes being naked stipulations, their character must be determined by resorting
to other evidences of the law of nations. In other words, the question concerning the
treaty must be decided by the law, not the question concerning the law by the treaty.*

In the present case, it has been shewn, from the sources generally allowed to be the
most authentic, that the law of nations is violated by the principle asserted by Great
Britain. It is a just inference, therefore, that every article in treaties contradicting that
principle, is an affirmance and direct proof of the general law; and that any stipulation
of the principle would, as an exception to the general law, be an indirect proof of it.

But supposing, for a moment, the present case to belong to that class, in which the
great oracles of the law of nations are obscure, or at variance among themselves; and
in which, moreover, the practice of nations, not being uniform, is an unsatisfactory
guide; and consequently, that the evidence of treaties were necessary in order to
ascertain the law; still, it will be found that the result of an appeal to that evidence is
conclusive against the British pretension. It may be confidently affirmed, that on no
point ever drawn into question, the evidence of Treaties was more uniform, more
extensive, or more satisfactory.

Nay more; it may be affirmed that the treaties applicable to this case may fairly be
considered in their relation to the law of nations last noticed; that is, as constituting a
law of themselves. If, in any case, Treaties can be sufficiently general, sufficiently
uniform, and of sufficient duration, to attest that general and settled concurrence of
nations in a principle or rule of conduct among themselves, which amounts to the
establishment of a general law; such an effect cannot reasonably be refused to the
number and character of the treaties which are applicable to the present case.


That Treaties may amount to a law of nations, follows from the very definition of that
law; which consists of those rules of conduct which reason deduces, as consonant to
justice and common good, from the nature of the society existing among independent
nations; with such definitions and modifications as may be established by general
consent.

One evidence of general consent is general usage, which implies general consent.

Can treaties which express consent be an inferior evidence, where nothing on the face
of the treaties, nor in any collateral authority on the law of nations is found to impair
the evidence?

Treaties may indeed in one point of view be considered as a higher authority than
usage, when they have a generality and continuance, equal to the generality and
continuance which give to usage the authority of law; because all treaties involve a
usage commensurate with the sphere in which they are obligatory. Whilst usage,
therefore, implies consent; treaties imply the usage, at the same time that they express
the consent of the parties to them.*

But there is another point of view in which the influence of treaties, those at least of
peace and of commerce, in modifying and defining the rules of public law applicable
to periods of war, ought, in preference to the influence of mere practice, to be
promoted by all governments which respect justice and humanity, and by all jurists
who aspire to the authority of commentators on that subject.

The law of nations, as derived from mere usage or practice during those periods, is
evidence for the most part by ex parte ordinances, issued by belligerent governments,
in the midst of the passions or policy of war; and by judicial decisions, also ex parte,
and biassed more or less by the same causes, if not by the interest also, which weighty
individuals, or perhaps bodies of individuals have, in widening the field of predatory
wealth.

Treaties are formed under very different circumstances. Those of peace imply that the
hostile passions and pursuits have spent their force, and that a neutral spirit of
liberality and accommodation have taken their place: treaties of commerce again are
necessarily founded in principles of reciprocal justice and interest, wholly at variance
with the violent spirit of war: whilst in the negociation of treaties of both kinds the
respective efforts and interests of the parties form those mutual checks, require those
mutual concessions, and involve those mutual appeals to a moral standard of right,
which are most likely to make both parties converge to a just and reasonable
conclusion. Nor is a sense of character without its effect on such occasions. Nations
would not stipulate in the face of the world things, which each of them would
separately do, in pursuit of its selfish objects.

It will accordingly be found, as might be expected, that the violent and cruel maxims
of war, those still remaining, as well as those from time to time exploded, have had
their origin and their continuance in the separate usages of belligerent nations, not in
treaties; whilst on the other hand, it will be found that the reformation of those abuses


has been the gradual work of treaties; that the spirit of treaties is, with few, if any
exceptions, at all times more just, more rational, and more benevolent, than the spirit
of the law derived from practice only; and consequently, that all further meliorations
of the code of public law, are to be expected from the former, not the latter source;
and consequently, again, that all enlightened friends to the happiness of nations ought
to favor the influence of treaties on the great code by which their intercourse is to be
regulated.

The authority of every treaty is to be considered as opposed to the principle asserted
by Great Britain, where it either stipulates a general freedom of neutral commerce
with a specification of exceptions to it, and an omission of this British exception; or
where it stipulates not only a neutral right generally to a free trade with belligerent
nations, but particularly a right to trade freely to and between the ports of such
nations. These stipulations, by the force of the terms, necessarily comprehend the
coasting and colonial trades, as well as other branches of commerce.

It would be a waste of time to bestow it on the treaties of a remote period, partaking
too little of the civilization and spirit of more modern times, to edify them by its
examples. It will be sufficient to commence this review with the treaty of Westphalia
in 1648, which forms an important epoch in the commercial and political history of
Europe, and to remark as the result of some enquiry into antecedent treaties, that they
contain nothing which can give the least countenance to the principle under
examination.

It will be sufficient also to limit the review of treaties, where Great Britain is not a
party, to those of most importance, either for the tenor of the stipulations, or for the
particular parties to them, with marginal references to others of analogous import;
remarking again generally, that these others are all, either negatively or positively,
authorities against Great Britain.

As a more convenient distribution also, the first review will stop with the epoch of the
armed neutrality. The relation, which the treaties subsequent to that event have to the
subject, will be noticed by itself.

Examples To Which Great Britain Is Not A Party.

By a treaty concerning navigation and commerce in 1650, preceded by a particular
article on the same subject concluded in 1648, it is stipulated between the United
Provinces and Spain “that the subjects and inhabitants of the United Provinces (and
those of Spain reciprocally), may sail and trade with all freedom and safety in all the
kingdoms, States, and countries which are or shall be in peace, amity, or neutrality,
with the State of the said United Provinces; and that they shall not be disquieted or
molested in this liberty by the ships or subjects of the King of Spain, upon the account
of hostilities which may exist, or may happen afterwards, between the said King of
Spain and the aforesaid kingdoms, countries, and States, or any of them that may be in
amity or neutrality with the said lords the States as above.”*


This liberty, in relation to France, was to extend to all sorts of merchandize which
might be carried thither before she was at war with Spain; even contraband of war,†
not proceeding from the States of Spain herself, and capable of being used against the
Spanish dominions.

With respect to other countries at peace with the United Provinces, and at war with
Spain, the enumerated articles of contraband were not to be carried to them by the
United Provinces, but all articles not contraband were to be freely carried, with the
exception only of cities and places invested or blockaded.

The Pyrenean treaty, between France and Spain in 1659, established so close a
friendship between the two nations, that they were mutually restrained from giving
either of them to those attacking the other, any assistance in men, money, or victuals,
or with passage through his dominions. Yet it is stipulated in Arts. X—XVI, which
are reciprocal, that the French shall have liberty to trade to all parts whatsoever,
though they should be in war with his Catholic Majesty, excepting Portugal,* whilst it
continued in the condition it then was in; all merchandize may be transported to other
countries in war with Spain, as was allowed before the said war, excepting† such as
proceed from the Spanish dominions, and as may be serviceable against Catholic
King or his dominions, and contraband goods. By contraband goods are understood
all sorts of arms and warlike stores; but corn and all manner of provision and goods,
not being arms and warlike stores, are not reputed contraband, and they may be
carried to places in war with Spain, excepting to Portugal and blockaded places. The
French vessels, passing from the ports of Spain to any port in enmity with that crown,
shall not be in any way retarded or molested, after producing their passes, specifying
their lading.*

It here appears, that the parties were at liberty, when neutral, to trade to all parts of a
belligerent country, not blockaded, and in all merchandizes not contraband.

The expression “as was allowed before the said war,” in this and in the preceding
examples, clearly falls within the observations made on the like expressions, used by
the writers on the law of nations. They are merely a mode of describing the indefinite
right to trade, as if no war had arisen, and consequently to enter into any new channels
of trade which might be opened to them.

In a treaty in 1662, between France and the United Provinces, it is stipulated, Arts.
XXVI, XXVII, &c., that the parties reciprocally are to trade and navigate with all
freedom and safety to countries respectively at war with one and at peace with the
other, without any exceptions made by the treaty, other than a trade in contraband, or
to a place blockaded.†

The treaty between France and the United Provinces Arts, XXVII—XXIX, as
incorporated with the treaty of Breda in 1667, between the latter power and England,
declares that the subjects of either party may sail and traffic in all countries at any
time, in peace with one and at war with the other, and this transportation and traffic
shall extend to all articles not contraband, and to all places not blockaded.‡


In a treaty in 1672, between France and Sweden, Arts. XXIII—XXIX, are of
corresponding import.§

A treaty in 1675, between Sweden and the United Provinces, contains like stipulations
in the three first and following articles.?

A declaration made in 1676, by Spain and the United Provinces, confirming the treaty
of 1650, stipulates the right of either party to trade with the enemy of the other, as
well directly as between enemy’s ports, whether the ports belong to the same or
different enemies, contraband goods and places blockaded being excepted.*

In Art. XIII, &c., of another treaty in 1678, between France and the United Provinces,
the same points are again stipulated.†

The 13th Art. of another treaty in 1679, between Sweden and the United Provinces,
contains a like stipulation.‡

So again the like stipulation is contained in Art. XIII of another treaty in 1679,
between France and the United Provinces.§

In a treaty in 1701, between Denmark and the United Provinces, the stipulations
import an uninterrupted commerce of the neutral with an enemy of the other party,
with the usual exception of contraband.?

The like stipulation is found in a treaty of 1716, Art. VIII, between France and the
Hanse Towns.¶

A treaty, Art. VI, between the Emperor Charles VI, and Philip V, of Spain, May 1,
1725, is of like import.**

The same is the language of a treaty in 1752, between Naples and Holland.††

A treaty, Art. XVI, in 1767, between France and Hamburg, and another between
France and the Duke of Mecklenburg in 1779, maintain the same doctrine.‡‡

To these authorities derived from the conventional law of Europe, against the British
principle under investigation.§§ might be added, if it were necessary, references to
other treaties of the like tenor.

Treaties To Which England First, And Then Great Britain,
Was A Party.

By a treaty with Sweden, in 1654, and another in 1656, confirming and explaining the
former, it is stipulated, Art. II—IV, that it shall be lawful for the subjects of either of
the confederates to trade with the enemies of the other; and, without impediment, to
carry to them, except to places blockaded or besieged, any goods whatsoever not
contraband, of which a specification is inserted. Provision is also made for the


efficacy of passports in certain cases, and against the abuse of them for covering
enemies’ property.*

The weight of these examples is not diminished by the name of Cromwell, under
whose authority the treaties were concluded in behalf of England. In foreign
transactions, as well as at home, his character was distinguished by a vigor not likely
to relinquish or impair rights, in which his country, as a warlike and maritime power,
was interested.

On the other hand, it adds weight to the examples, that they are treaties of alliance,
containing mutual engagements of friendship and assistance; and, consequently, the
less apt to indulge the parties in an intercourse with the enemies of each other, beyond
the degree required by the law of nations. This observation is applicable to all the
succeeding examples, where the treaties are of the same kind.

On the restoration of Charles II, a treaty of alliance was concluded with Sweden in
1661, the 11th Article of which, in pursuance of those above copied from the treaties
of 1654 and 1656, stipulates anew, that neither party shall be impeded in carrying to
the enemies of the other, any merchandize whatever, with the exceptions only of
articles of contraband, and of ports or places besieged.*

In a treaty with Spain, May 13, 1667, the Articles XXI—XXVI import, that the
subjects of each shall trade freely in all kingdoms, estates, and countries at war with
the other, in all merchandizes not contraband; with no other exception of places but
those besieged or blockaded.†

In July, 1667, a treaty was concluded with the United Provinces, of which Art. III
provisionally adopts certain articles from the treaty of Breda, between the United
Provinces and France, on the subject of maritime commerce; until a fuller treaty could
be perfected between the parties. The articles adopted, in relation to the trade between
the subjects of one of the parties and the enemies of the other, declare that the trade
shall extend, without impediment, to all articles not contraband, and to all places not
besieged or blockaded.‡

In February, 1667-8, the same parties, then under a perpetual defensive alliance by
virtue of a treaty of 21st July, 1667, and in a league moreover with Sweden by the
triple league of 1668, resumed the subject of maritime and commercial affairs, and
repeated, in the first article of their treaty, the precise stipulations adopted
provisionally from the treaty between France and the United Provinces.§

A treaty with Denmark, in 1669, stipulates, that they may trade each with the enemies
of the other, in all articles not contraband, and to all places not blockaded, without any
other exceptions.?

On the 11th July, 1670, another treaty of alliance was concluded with Denmark, the
16th Art. of which declares that “neither of the parties shall be impeded in furnishing
to the enemies of the other any merchandizes whatever; excepting only articles of
contraband, as described in the treaty, and ports and places besieged by the other.”¶


It is worthy of notice in this treaty, and the remark is applicable to others, that the 5th
Art. having stipulated a right mutually to trade in the kingdoms, provinces, marts,
towns, ports, and rivers of each other, it was immediately provided in the next article,
that prohibited ports and colonies should be excepted. If it had been conceived that
such ports or colonies of enemies were not to be traded with, under the general right
to trade with enemies acknowledged in the 16th Article, it is manifest that they would
have been as carefully excepted in this, as in the other case, out of the meaning of
general terms equally comprehending them. This treaty proves also, that as early as
1670, colonies began to fall under attention in making treaties.

In a maritime treaty of December 1, 1674, with the United Provinces, stating in the
title that it was “to be observed throughout all and every the countries and ports of the
world by sea and land,” it is stipulated again, in Art. I, to be “lawful for all and every
the subjects of the most serene and mighty prince, the King of Great Britain, with all
freedom and safety to sail, trade, and exercise any manner of traffic in all those
kingdoms, countries, and estates, which are, or any time hereafter shall be in peace,
amity, or neutrality with his said majesty; so that they shall not be any ways hindered
or molested in their navigation or trade, by the military forces, nor by the ships of war
or any kind of vessels whatsoever, belonging either to the High and Mighty States
General of the United Netherlands, or to their subjects, upon occasion or pretence of
any hostility or difference which now is, or shall hereafter happen between the said
Lords the States General, and any princes, or people whatsoever, in peace, amity, or
neutrality with his said majesty;” and so reciprocally.

Art. II. “Nor shall this freedom of navigation and commerce be infringed by occasion
or cause of any war, in any kind of merchandizes, but shall extend to all commodities
which may be carried in time of peace, those only excepted which follow in the next
article, and are comprehended under the name of contraband.”

Art. III enumerates the articles of contraband.

Art. IV contains a negative list, which, with all other articles not expressly included in
the list of contraband, may be freely transported and carried to places under the
obedience of enemies,* except only towns or places besieged, environed, or invested.†

This recital has been made the more minute, because it is necessary, in order to
understand the whole force of the explanatory declaration between the parties bearing
the same date; a document so peculiarly important in the present discussion, that its
contents will be recited with equal exactness,

This document, after stating “that some difficulty had arisen concerning the
interpretation of certain articles, as well in the treaty marine concluded this first day
of December, 1674, as in that which was concluded the 17th February, 1667—8,
between his majesty of Great Britain on the one part, and the States General, &c., on
the other part,” proceeds to state “that Sir William Temple, &c., on one part with
eight commissioners on the other, have declared, and do by these presents declare,
that the true meaning and intention of the said articles is, and ought to be, that ships
and vessels belonging to the subjects of either of the parties, can and might, from the


time that the said articles were concluded, not only pass, traffic and trade, from a
neutral port or place, to a place in enmity with the other party, or from a place in
enmity to a neutral place, but also from a port or place in enmity to a port or place in
enmity with the other party, whether the said places belong to one and the same prince
or State, or to several princes or States, with whom the other party is in war. And we
declare that this is the true and genuine sense and meaning of the said articles;
pursuant whereunto we understand that the said articles are to be observed and
executed on all occasions, on the part of his said majesty, and the said States General,
and their respective subjects; yet so that this declaration shall not be alleged by either
party for matters which happened before the conclusion of the late peace in the month
of February, 1673-4.*

Prior to the peace, neither of them could claim the rights of neutrality against the
other.

This declaratory stipulation has been said to be peculiarly important. It is so for
several reasons:

1st. Because it determines the right of the neutral party, so far as may depend on the
belligerent party, to trade not only between its own ports and those of the enemies of
the belligerent party, without any exception of colonies, but between any other neutral
port and enemies’ ports, without exception of colonial ports of the enemy; and
moreover, not only between the ports colonial as well as others, of one enemy and
another enemy, but between the different ports of the same enemy; and consequently
between one port and another of the principal country; between these and the ports of
its colonies; between the ports of one colony and another; and even to carry on the
coasting trade of any particular colony.

2d. Because it fixes the meaning not only of the articles in the two specified treaties;
but has the same effect on all other stipulations by Great Britain, expressed in the
same or equivalent terms; one or other of which are used in most, if not all her treaties
on this subject.

3d. Because it made a part of the treaties explained, that free ships should make free
goods; and consequently, the coasting and colonial trade, when combined with that
neutral advantage, was the less likely to be acknowledged, if not considered as clearly
belonging to the neutral party.

4th. Because the explanatory article was the result of the*solicitation of England
herself, and she actually claimed and enjoyed the benefit of the article, she being at
the time in peace, and the Dutch in war with France.†

In the treaty with France, February 24, 1677, Articles I, II, and III, import that each
party may trade freely with the enemies of the other, with the same merchandize as in
time of peace, contraband goods only excepted, and that all merchandizes not
contraband “are free to be carried from any port in neutrality, to the port of an enemy,
and from one port of an enemy to another; towns besieged, blocked up or invested,
only excepted.”‡


In 1689, England entered into the convention with Holland, prohibiting all neutral
commerce with France, then the enemy of both.§ In consequence of the counter treaty
of Sweden and Denmark, for defending their neutral rights against this violent
measure, satisfaction was made, according to Vattel, for the ships taken from them;
without the slightest evidence, as far as can be traced, that any attempt was made by
either of the belligerent parties, to introduce the distinction between such part of the
trade interrupted, as might not have been allowed before the war, and as was therefore
unlawful, and such part as having been allowed before the war, might not lawfully be
subject to capture.

We are now arrived at the treaties of Utrecht, an epoch so important in the history of
Europe, and so essentially influencing the conventional law of nations, on the subject
of neutral commerce.

The treaty of navigation and commerce, March 31, 1713, between Great Britain and
France, Article XVII, imports, that all the subjects of each party shall sail with their
ships with all manner of liberty and security, no distinction being made who are the
proprietors of the merchandizes laden thereon, from any port, to the places of those
who now are, or shall hereafter be, at enmity with the queen of Great Britain and the
Christian king, and “to trade with the same liberty and security from the places, ports
and havens of those who are enemies of both or of either party, without any
opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly from the places of the enemy
aforementioned to neutral places, but also from one place belonging to an enemy, to
another place belonging to an enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the
same prince or under several.”

Art. XVIII. “This liberty of navigation and commerce, shall extend to all kind of
merchandizes, excepting those only which follow in the next article, and which are
specified by the name of contraband.”

Art. XIX gives a list of contraband, which is limited to warlike instruments.

Art. XX specifies others, many of which are in other treaties on the list of contraband,
declaring that these with all other goods, not in the list of contraband in the preceding
article, “may be carried and transported in the freest manner by the subjects of both
confederates, even to places belonging to an enemy, such towns or places being only
excepted as are at that time, beseiged, blocked up round about, or invested.”*

Could the principle maintained against Great Britain be more clearly laid down, or
more strongly fortified by her sanction?

To give to this example the complete effect which it ought to have, several remarks
are proper.

In the first place, on comparing the description given of the free trade, which might be
carried on between the neutral party and an enemy of the other party, with the
description of the free trade allowed between the parties themselves, by the 1st article
of the treaty, it appears that in order to except the colonial trade in the latter case, the


freedom stipulated in Article I, is expressly limited to Europe. The terms are, “that
there shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and commerce
between the subjects on each part, through all and every the kingdoms, States,
dominions of their royal majesties in Europe.” In the stipulation relating to the neutral
commerce of either with the enemy of the other (who, if a maritime enemy, could not
fail to possess colonies out of Europe), the terms are, “that all merchandizes, not
contraband, may be carried in the freest manner to places belonging to an enemy, such
towns or places only being excepted, as are at that time besieged, or blockaded, &c.,”
without any limitation to Europe, or exception of colonies any where. It is obvious,
that the terms here used comprehend all colonies, as much as the terms in the first
article would have done, if colonies had not been excepted by limiting the freedom of
trade to places “in Europe;” and consequently that if any distinction between the
colonial and other places of an enemy, had been contemplated in the neutral trade of
either party with him, as it was contemplated between the colonies and European
possessions of the parties in their commerce to be carried on between themselves, the
distinction would have been expressed in the latter case, as it was in the former; and
not being so expressed, the trade in the latter case was to be as free to the colonies as
it would have been in the former, if the colonies had not been excepted by the
limitation of the trade to Europe.*

Secondly. But the treaty not content with this necessary construction, in favor of a
neutral commerce with the colonies of an enemy, proceeds, in conformity to the
example in the declaratory convention between England and Holland in 1674,
explicitly to declare the freedom of the neutral party, to trade not only from any port,
to the places of an enemy, and from the places of an enemy to neutral places, but also
from one place to another place belonging to an enemy, whether the places be under
the same or different sovereigns. Here both the coasting trade and the colonial trade,
which, in relation to the parent country, is in the nature of a coasting trade, are both
placed on the same footing with every other branch of commerce between neutral and
belligerent parties, although it must have been well known, that both those branches
are generally shut to foreigners in time of peace, and if opened at all, would be opened
in time of war, and for the most part, on account of the war.

Thirdly. It is well known, that this particular treaty underwent great opposition and
discussion, both without and within the British Parliament; and that it was for some
time, under a legislative negative. Yet it does not appear, either from the public
debates, or from the discussions of the press, as far as there has been an opportunity of
consulting them, that the difficulty arose in the least from this part of the treaty. The
contest seems to have turned wholly on other parts, and principally on the regulations
of the immediate commerce between the two nations. This part of the treaty may be
considered, therefore, as having received the complete sanction of Great Britain. Had
it indeed been otherwise, the repeated sanctions given to it on subsequent occasions,
would preclude her from making the least use of any repugnance shewn to it on this.

On the 28th November, 1713, a treaty of peace and another of commerce and
navigation, were concluded at Utrecht with Spain, renewing and inserting the treaty of
May 13th, 1667, the 21st and 26th Articles of which have been seen to coincide with


the rules of neutral commerce, established by the treaty at Utrecht, between Great
Britain and France.*

Genoa and Venice were comprehended in the treaty of Utrecht, between Great Britain
and Spain.†

The above treaty of 1713, was confirmed by Article XII, of a treaty of December 3,
1715, between Great Britain and Spain.‡

From the above date to the treaty of 1748, at Aix la Chapelle, the following treaties
between England and other powers took place; in each of which, the principles
established by her treaties at Utrecht, are reiterated.

With Sweden, January 21, 1720, Article XVIII.§

With Spain, June 13, 1721, Article II.—Confirming the treaty of 1667 and 1713.?

With France and Spain, November, 9, 1729, Article, I.—Renewing all treaties of
peace, of friendship, and of commerce, and consequently those of Utrecht.¶

With the Emperor of Germany and the United Netherlands, March 16, 1731, Article
I.—Renewing all former treaties of peace, friendship, and alliance.**

With Russia, December 2, 1734.—Stipulating in Article II, a free trade between either
party and the enemy of the other, in all articles except munitions of war; and
consequently articles permitted after, though not permitted before, the war.††

With Spain, (a convention,) January 14, 1739, Article I.—Reiterating among former
treaties, those of 1667 and 1713, above cited.‡‡

The treaty of Aix la Chapelle concluded in 1748, forms another memorable epoch in
the political system of Europe. The immediate parties to it were Great Britain, France,
and the United Provinces.

The 3d* Art. of this treaty renews and confirms, among others, the treaties of
Utrecht.†

This treaty was acceded to by Spain, Austria, Sardinia, Genoa, and Modena.

In 1763,‡ in the treaty between Great Britain, France, and Spain, to which Portugal
acceded, the 1st Art. expressly renews and confirms, among other treaties, the treaties
of peace and commerce at Utrecht.§

The treaty with Russia in 1766, Art. X, stipulates a free trade between either party,
being neutral, and an enemy of the other, with the sole exception of military stores,
and places actually blockaded.?

In a convention with Denmark, July 4, 1780, explanatory of a list of contraband
settled in a former treaty, it is expressly determined that merchandize not contraband,


may be transported to places in possession of enemies, without any other exception
than those beseiged or blockaded.¶

The treaty of peace in 1783 with France, by Art. II, renews and confirms, among
others, the treaties of Westphalia in 1648, of Utrecht in 1713, of Aix la Chapelle in
1748, and of Paris, 1763; in all of which the neutral right, now denied by Great
Britain, was formally sanctioned by her stipulations.**

In her treaty of the same date, with Spain, the same confirmation is repeated.*

In the treaty of commerce again with France in 1786, deliberately undertaken in
pursuance of Art. XVIII, of the treaty of 1783, the articles above recited from the
treaty of Utrecht are inserted word for word; and thus received anew the most
deliberate and formal sanction.—Chalm., vol. 1, p. 350.

It may be here again remarked, that although this treaty underwent the most violent
opposition in Great Britain, it does not appear that the opposition was at all directed
against the articles on the subject of neutral commerce.

The treaty of 1786 was explained and altered in several particulars, by a convention
bearing date August 31, 1787; without any appearance of dissatisfaction, on either
side, with the articles on neutral commerce.

In the negotiations at Lisle, in 1797, it was proposed on the part of Great Britain, by
her ambassador, Lord Malmesbury, to insert, as heretofore usual in the articles of
peace, a confirmation of the treaties of Utrecht, Aix la Chapelle, &c., which was
opposed by the French negotiators, for reasons foreign to the articles of those treaties
in question.

On this occasion, Lord Malmesbury, in urging the proposed insertion, observed, “that
those treaties had become the law of nations, and that if they were omitted† it might
produce confusion.” This fact is attested by the negotiations, as published by the
British Government.‡

If the treaties had become, or were founded in, the law of nations, such an omission,
although it might be made a pretext for cavil between the parties, could certainly have
no effect on the law of nations; and if the treaties expressed the law of nations on any
subject at all, on what subject, it might be asked, have they been more explicit than on
that of the maritime rights of neutrals?

This series of treaties, to which Great Britain is an immediate party, lengthy and
strong as it is, has not exhausted the examples by which she stands self-condemned.
One, in particular, remains for consideration; which, if it stood alone, ought forever to
silence her pretensions. It is the treaty with Russia on the 5-17 of June, 1801.

A very important part of the treaty is the preamble:

“The mutual desire of his majesty the King of the United Kingdoms, &c., and his
majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, being not only to come to an understanding


between themselves with respect to the differences which have lately interrupted the
good understanding and friendly relations which subsist between the two States; but
also to prevent, by frank and precise explanations upon the navigation of their
respective subjects, the renewal of similar altercations and troubles which might be
the consequence of them; and the common object of the solicitude of their said
majesties being to settle, as soon as can be done, an equitable arrangement of those
differences, and an invariable determination of their principles upon the rights of
neutrality, in their application to their respective monarchies, in order to unite more
closely the ties of friendship and good intercourse, &c., have named for their
plenipotentiaries, &c., who have agreed,” &c.

With this declaratory preamble in view, attend to the following sections in Article III:

“His Britannic majesty and his Imperial majesty of all the Russias having resolved to
place under a sufficient safeguard the freedom of commerce and navigation of their
subjects, in case one of them shall be at war while the other shall be neuter, have
agreed;

“1st. That the ships of the neutral power may navigate freely to the ports and upon
the coasts of the nations at war.

“2d. That the effects embarked on board neutral ships shall be free, with the
exception of contraband of war and of enemy’s property; and it is agreed not to
comprize under the denomination of the latter, the merchandize of the produce,
growth, or manufactures of the countries at war which should have been acquired by
the subjects of the neutral power, and should be transported on their account; which
merchandize cannot be excepted in any case from the freedom granted to the flag of
the said power,” &c., &c.

These extracts will receive additional weight from the following considerations:

First. This treaty, made with Russia, the power that took the lead in asserting the
principles of the armed neutrality, was, with exceptions not affecting the point in
question, acceded to by Sweden and Denmark, the two other European powers most
deeply interested in, and attached to, those principles. It is a treaty, therefore, of Great
Britain, as to this particular point, as well as to most of the others, with Russia,
Sweden, and Denmark.

Secondly. The treaty had for its great object, as appears by its adoption of so many of
the definitions of the armed neutrality, to fix the law of nations on the several points
therein, which had been so much contested; the three northern powers yielding the
point of free ships, free goods; and Great Britain yielding to all of them, those relating
to the coasting, as well as every other branch of neutral trade; to blockades, and to the
mode of search; and yielding to Russia, moreover, the point relating to the limitation
of contraband. With respect to the case of convoys, a case not comprehended in the
armed neutrality of 1780, but of much subsequent litigation, and inserted in that of
1800; a modification, satisfactory to the northern Powers, was yielded by Great
Britain; with a joint agreement that the subjects on both sides should be prohibited


from carrying contraband or prohibited goods, according to an article in the armed
neutrality of both dates.

Thirdly. The treaty is expressly declared to be an invariable determination [fixation],
of their principles upon the rights ofneutrality, in their application to their respective
monarchies.

It cannot be pretended that this stipulated application of the rights of neutrality to the
contracting parties, limits the declaratory effect, which is equally applicable to all
neutral nations. Principles and rights must be the same in all cases, and in relation to
all nations; and it would not be less absurd than it would be dishonorable, to profess
one set of principles or rights in the law of nations towards one nation, and another set
towards another nation.

If there be any parts of the treaty, to which this declaratory character is regarded as
not applicable, it cannot be pretended that they are the parts relating to the rights of
neutrals to trade freely to the ports and on the coasts of nations at war; because, as
already observed, the main object of the treaty was to settle the questions involved in
the armed neutrality; of which this was a primary one, and is here placed by the
structure of the article under the same precise stipulation, with the liability to
confiscation, of enemy’s property in neutral ships; a point above all others which
Great Britain must have wished to consecrate as the law of nations, by declaratory
acts for that purpose.

It cannot be pretended that the neutral rights here declared, do not extend to the
colonial as well as coasting trade of belligerent nations, because the colonial trade is
not only included in a “free trade to the ports and on the coasts” of such nations, but
because it is expressly declared that the effects belonging to neutrals, and transported
on their account from countries at war, cannot be excepted from the freedom of the
neutral flag in any case, and consequently not in the case of colonies, more than any
other portion of such countries. It is not improper to remark that this declaratory
stipulation is not only included in the same article, which recognised the principle that
enemy’s property is excepted from the freedom of the neutral flag, but is associated
with that recognition in the same section of the article, and even in the same
sentence.*

If it were possible to controvert the construction here given to the treaty, a reference
might be made to a very able speech delivered by Lord Grenville in the British House
of Lords in November 1801, in which this very construction is fully demonstrated.
The demonstration is rendered the more striking by the embarrassed and feeble
opposition made to it by the ingenuity of the very able speakers who entered the list
against him.*

Such is the accumulated and irresistible testimony borne by Great Britain, in her own
treaties, against the doctrine asserted by her.


It will be in order now to resume the notice of treaties to which she was not a party,
but which authorize some inferences and observations contributing still further, if
possible, to invalidate her novel pretensions.

The review heretofore taken of this class of treaties was limited to such as preceded
the armed neutrality. Those now to be added, are principally the treaties and
conventions entered into in the years 1780 and 1800.

The treaties of 1780 declare the right of neutrals in the case under discussion, in the
following terms: “that all vessels shall be permitted to navigate from port to port, and
on the coasts of the belligerent powers.” Those of 1800 are in terms too little varied to
require recital.

It has never been questioned, that these definitions of the neutral right were as
applicable to colonies as to any other of the territories belonging to a belligerent
nation. All the British writers have so understood the text, and in that sense, have
employed their pens against it.

It need scarcely be remarked that the treaties in question were framed with a view, not
of making a new law of nations, but of declaring and asserting the law as it actually
stood. The preamble to the convention of 1800, for the re-establishment of an armed
neutrality between Russia and Sweden, explains the object in the terms following: “In
order that the freedom of navigation and the security of merchandize of the neutral
powers may be established, and the principles of the law of nations be fully
ascertained, &c.”

The preamble to the convention of 1780, states the principles avowed by the parties to
be the principles derived from the primitive rights of nations.”

The treaty of 1780 was originally concluded between Russia and Denmark. But it was
acceded to by Sweden, Prussia, the United Provinces, Austria, Portugal and Naples;
and in effect, by France and Spain. The principles of the treaty had the sanction also
of the United States of America in their cruising ordinances. Thus it is seen, that with
the exception of Great Britain alone, all the powers of Europe, materially interested in
the maritime law of nations, have given a recent and repeated sanction to the right of
neutrals to trade freely with every part of the countries at war. And although several
of those nations have, on some of the points contained in these treaties, as on the
points of contraband and enemy’s property under neutral flags, entered since into
adverse stipulations; not one of them has by treaty or otherwise relinquished the
particular right under consideration,* whilst Great Britain, as we have seen in her
treaty with Russia, has herself, expressly acceded to the right.

The importance of treaties in deciding the law of nations, or that portion of it, which is
founded in the consent of nations, will justify the extent which has been given to this
review of them, and the conclusion which this review justifies is, that the tenor of
treaties, throughout the whole period deserving attention, confirms the neutral right
contended for; that for more than one and a half centuries, Great Britain has, without
any other interruptions than those produced by her wars with particular nations, been


at all times bound by her treaties with the principal maritime nations of the world, to
respect this right; and what is truly remarkable, that throughout the long period of
time, and the voluminous collection of treaties, through which the research has been
carried, a single treaty only (putting aside the explanatory article between Great
Britain and Russia, noted above) has occurred, which forms an exception to the
general mass.

The exception will be found in an article of a Danish treaty of June, 1691,* with
England and Holland. In that article (the 3d) though somewhat obscure, either from
inaccuracy in the original text, or in the printed copy, it seems that Denmark
relinquished her neutral right of commerce between the ports of France, then at war
with the other parties. But this exception, instead of availing in any respect the
belligerent claim in question, corroborates the testimony furnished by treaties against
it; as will appear from the following observations:

1st. In other parts of the treaty, there are stipulations favorable to Denmark, which
may have been regarded as some compensation for the restriction imposed on herself.

2d. Admitting, however, the restriction to have been made without any compensating
advantages; the sacrifice might fairly be ascribed to the dreadful oppressions on the
Danish commerce, practised by England and Holland, and to the desire of Denmark,
as a weaker power, to effect some mitigation of her sufferings. These sufferings
cannot be better explained, than by an extract from the preamble to a treaty concluded
in 1693, between Denmark and Sweden, for the purpose of putting in force a
preconcerted plan of reprisals. “Although their majesties, the kings of Sweden and
Denmark had hoped, that after they had concluded their treaty of March, 1691, for
maintaining their navigation and commerce, the many unjust piracies exercised on
their subjects, would at length have ceased; they have nevertheless been grieved to
find that, notwithstanding the reclamations and remonstrances which they have from
time to time made to the parties engaged in the war, in order that an end might be put
to them, they have rather increased and augmented, even to a point that it is in a
manner impossible to express, the pretexts, the artifices, the inventions, the violences,
the chicaneries, the processes which have been practised, not only against the vessels
and goods of the subjects of their majesties, but also against their public convoys, to
the prejudice of the customs and tolls of their majesties, to the considerable
diminution of their duties and imports, and to the irreparable injury of their kingdoms
and provinces, the subjects of which have suffered and lost infinitely, in their persons,
their crews, their vessels, goods and merchandizes. Hence it is that their majesties
have been obliged, &c.”

Distresses, such as are here painted, might sufficiently account for concessions on the
part of a sufferer, without supposing them to flow from a deliberate or voluntary
acquiescence in the principle on which they were founded.

3. But admitting the stipulation to have been both gratuitous and deliberate, and to
form a fair exception to the general rule of treaties, still being but a single exception
to stipulations as numerous and as uniform as have been brought into view, the


exception must be considered as having all the effect in confirming the general rule,
which can be ascribed, in any case, to a confirmation of that sort.

4. The exception is limited to a trade between one French port and another. It implies,
therefore, and recognizes a freedom of trade between foreign and French ports, as
well colonial as others.

To this ample sanction, drawn from the conventional monuments of Europe, it will be
allowable to add the testimony of the only nation at once civilized and independent, in
the American hemisphere. The United States have, or have had, treaties with France,
Holland, Sweden, Russia, Spain, and Great Britain.* In all of these, except the treaty
with Great Britain, they have positively maintained the principle that neutrals may
trade freely between neutral and belligerent ports, and between one belligerent port
and another, whether under the same or different jurisdictions; and the treaty with
Great Britain contained not even an implication against the principle. It merely
omitted a stipulation on the subject, as it did on many others, contained in other
treaties.*

The Conduct Of Other Nations.

The evidence from this source is merely negative; but is not on that account without a
convincing effect. If the doctrine advanced by Great Britain had been entertained by
other nations, it would have been seen in the documents, corresponding with those
which contain the British doctrine. Yet, with all the research which could be
employed, no indication has been met with, that a single nation, besides herself, has
founded on the distinction between a trade permitted and a trade not permitted in time
of peace, a belligerent right to interrupt the trade in time of war. The distinction can
be traced neither in their diplomatic discussions, nor their manifestoes, nor their prize
ordinances, nor their instructions to their cruizers, nor in the decisions of their
maritime courts. If the distinction had been asserted or recognized, it could not fail to
have exhibited itself, in some or other of those documents. Having done so in none of
them, the inference cannot be contested, that Great Britain is the only nation that has
ever attempted this momentous innovation on the law of nations.

Conduct Of Great Britain.

If it be not enough to have shewn, that the belligerent claim asserted by Great Britain
is condemned by all the highest authorities on the law of nations, by the clearest
testimony of treaties among all the principal maritime nations of the world, herself
included, and by the practice of all other nations; she cannot surely demur to the
example of her own proceedings. And it is here, perhaps, more than any where else,
that the claim ought to shrink from examination. It will be seen, in the course of the
following observations, that Great Britain is compelled, under every appeal that can
be made to herself, to pronounce her own condemnation; and what is much worse,
that the innovation, which she endeavors to enforce as a right of war, is under that
name a mere project for extending the field of maritime capture, and multiplying the
sources of commercial aggrandizement; a warfare, in fact, against the commerce of
her friends, and a monopolizing grasp at that of her enemies.


1st. Whilst Great Britain denies to her enemies a right to relax their laws in favor of
neutral commerce, she relaxes her own, those relating as well to her colonial trade, as
to other branches.

2d. Whilst she denies to neutrals the right to trade with the colonies of her enemies,
she trades herself with her enemies, and invites them to trade with her colonies.

1st. That Great Britain relaxes in time of war her trade laws, both with respect to her
colonies and to herself, is a fact which need not be proved, because it is not denied. A
review of the progress and modifications of these relaxations will be found in
Reeves’* Law of Shipping and Navigation; and in the successive orders of the British
council, admitting in time of war neutral vessels, as well as neutral supplies, into her
West India colonies. It will not be improper, however, to shew, that in these
relaxations of her peace system, she has been governed by the same policy of eluding
the pressures of war, and of transferring her merchant ships and mariners from the
pursuits of commerce to the operations of war, which she represents as rendering
unlawful the like relaxations of her enemies.

The object of dispensing, in time of war, with the navigation act, was avowed by the
legislature itself, in the preamble to one of its acts, which was passed not long after
the navigation act was adopted. The preamble recites, “And whereas by the laws now
in force, the navigating of ships or vessels in divers cases, is required to be, the master
and three-fourth parts of the mariners being English, under divers penalties and
forfeitures therein contained: And whereas great numbers of seamen are employed in
her majesty’s service for the manning of theRoyal Navy, so that it is become
necessary, during the present war, to dispense with the said laws, and to allow a
greater number of foreign mariners for the carrying on of trade and commerce: Be it
enacted, &c., that during the present war,” &c.

Without pursuing the series of similar recitals during successive wars, one other
example of later date will be given, in which the same object is avowed. The
preamble of 13 G. 2, Ch. 3, is in the following words: “For the better supply of
mariners and seamen to serve in his majesty’s ships of war, and on board merchant
ships and other trading vessels and privateers, and for the better carrying on the
present or any future war, and the trade of Great Britain during the continuance
thereof,” &c.

The British orders of council, and proclamations of governors, issued from time to
time during war, and opening, on account of war, the colonial trade to neutrals, in
cases where it was shut to them in times of peace, are too well known to require
particular recital or reference. Orders to that effect are now in operation; and fully
justify the position, that, as well in the case of the colonial trade as of the trade with
the parent country, the same thing is done by Great Britain herself, which she denies
the right of doing to her enemies.

2d. That she trades with her enemies, and invites them to trade with herself, during
war, are facts equally certain and notorious.


The efforts of Great Britain to maintain a trade at all times with the colonies of other
nations, particularly of Spain, both in peace and in war, and both by force, and
clandestinely, are abundantly attested by her own, as well as other historians. The two
historians of Jamaica, Long and Edwards, are alone sufficient authorities on the
subject.

It has been already noticed, that, in the infancy of her belilgerent pretension against
the trade of neutrals with the colonies of her enemies, she favored, by special licences,
a trade of her own subjects with the same colonies.

The like inconsistency might be verified by a train of examples since the pretension
was, during the war of 1793, brought again into action. But it would be a waste of
time to multiply proofs of what is avowed and proclaimed to all the world by her acts
of parliament; particularly by the act of June 27, 1805, “to consolidate and extend the
provisions respecting the free ports in the West Indies.”

This act establishes certain free ports in Jamaica, Grenada, Dominica, Antigua,
Trinidad, Tobago, Tortola, New Providence, Crooked Island, St. Vincent’s, and
Bermuda. These ports, distributed throughout the West Indies, with a view to the most
convenient intercourse with the colonies, and settlements of her enemies in that
quarter, are laid open to all the valuable productions thereof, and to small vessels with
single decks, belonging to, and navigated by, inhabitants of such colonies and
settlements. In like manner, the enemies of Great Britain are allowed to export from
the enumerated ports, rum, negroes, and all goods, wares, and merchandizes,
excepting naval stores, which shall have been imported thither in British vessels.
Provision is, at the same time, made for the re-exportation, in British vessels, of the
enumerated productions imported from the colonies and settlements of her enemies, to
Great Britain and her possessions, according to the regulations prescribed by her
navigation act.

In pursuance of the same principle exercised in her laws, we find her entering into a
treaty in time of war, which, in one of its articles, opened a branch of colonial trade to
neutrals not open to them in time of peace, and which being to continue in force only
two years after the end of the war, may be considered as made in effect for the war.

The 12th Article of the treaty with the United States in 1794, stipulated that American
vessels not exceeding a given size, may trade between the ports of the United States
and the British West Indies, in cases prohibited to them by the colonial system in
times of peace. This article, it is true, was frustrated by the refusal of the United States
to ratify it; but the refusal did not proceed from any supposed illegality of the
stipulation. On the part of Great Britain the article had a deliberate and regular
sanction; and as it would not have been a lawful stipulation, but on the supposition
that a trade not open in peace may be opened in war, the conduct of Great Britain, in
this case also, is at variance with the rule she lays down for others.

But a most interesting view of the conduct of Great Britain will be presented by a
history of the novel principle which she is endeavoring to interpolate into the code of


public law, and by an examination of the fallacies and inconsistencies to which her
Government and her courts have resorted, in maintaining the principle.

It is a material fact that the principle was never asserted or enforced by her against
other nations, before the war of 1756.

That at the commencement of the preceding war of 1739, it did not occur, even to the
ingenuity of British statesmen labouring for parliamentary topics of argument, is
proven by the debate which, on that occasion, took place in the House of Lords.

In the course of the debate on the expediency of the war, this particular point having
fallen under consideration, the following observations were made by Lord Hervey
against the war:

“Some people may perhaps imagine that great advantages might be made by our
intercepting the Spanish plate fleets, or the ships that are employed in the trade with
their settlements in America, because no Spanish ships can be employed in that trade;
but even this would be precarious, and might in several shapes be entirely prevented;
for if they should open that trade to the French and Dutch, it is what those two nations
would be glad to accept of, and we could not pretend to make prize of a French or
Dutch ship on account of her being bound to or from theSpanish settlements in
America,no more than we could make prize of her on account of her being bound to
or from any portin Spain. We could not so much as pretend to seize any treasure or
goods (except contraband she had on board) unless we could prove that those goods
or treasure actually belonged to the King or subjects of Spain. Thus the Spanish
treasure and effects might safely be brought, &c.”

Lord Bathurst in answer:

“We may do the Spaniards much damage by privateering, &c. If they bring their
treasure home in flotas, we intercept them by our squadrons; if in single ships our
privateers take them. They cannot bring it home either in French or Dutch ships,*
because by the 6th Article of the treaty of Utrecht, the King of France is expressly
obliged not to accept of any other usage of navigation to Spain and the Spanish Indies,
than what was practised in the reign of Charles II, of Spain, or than what shall
likewise be fully given and granted at the same time to other nations and people
concerned in trade. Therefore, the Spaniards could not lay the trade in America open
to the French, or at least the French could not accept of it; and if the Dutch should,
they would be opposed by France as well as by us; an opposition they would not, I
believe, chuse to struggle with.”*

Through the whole of the debate the subject is taken up, not on the ground of a
belligerent right, or of a neutral duty, but merely on that of commercial jealousy and
policy. Had the distinction between a trade allowed in peace as well as war, and a
trade allowed in war only, been maintained by British statesmen then, as it is
maintained by them now, the same ready answer would have been given then, as in a
like discussion, would be given now, viz: that neither France nor Holland could enter


into a trade with the Spanish colonies, because, being a trade not open in time of
peace, it could not be laid open in time of war.

In the debates also, which took place in the House of Lords, concerning the Spanish
captures in America, and the war which followed, several of the Lords in their
speeches lay down in detail, the cases in which belligerent nations may search,
capture, and confiscate neutral vessels in time of war; yet, although colonial trade was
the immediate subject of discussion, the distinction now employed, seems never to
have entered into the thoughts of the speakers.

Again, in the course of this war to which France became a party on the side of Spain
in 1744, it appears that the tribunals of Great Britain proceeded on the same principle,
that the trade of neutrals with the colonies of her enemies, though not open in time of
peace, might be a lawful trade in time of war. For this there is the testimony of
Robinson’s reports, in which it is stated, that ships taken on a voyage from the French
colonies, were released before the Lords of Appeal.*

We find then, that prior to the war of 1756, this belligerent claim of attacking all
neutral commerce not permitted in time of peace, a claim so broad in its principle and
so baneful in its operation, never had a place among the multiplied pretensions
enforced by power, or suggested by avarice. At some times nations have been seen
engaged in attempts to prevent all commerce whatever with their enemies; at others to
extend the list of contraband to the most innocent and necessary articles of common
interchange; at others to subject to condemnation both vessel and cargo, where either
the one or the other was the property of an enemy; at others to make the hostility of
the country producing the cargo, a cause of its confiscation. But at no time, as seems
to be admitted by Sir William Scott himself,† was this encroachment on the rights of
neutrality devised by any nation until the war of 1756. Then it was that the naval
resources of Great Britain augmented by her prosperous commerce, more especially
that of her then colonies, now the United States of America, gave her an ascendancy
over all her rivals and enemies, and prompted those abuses which raised the voice of
all Europe against her.

The first effect of this overgrown power was seen in the bold enterprise of seizing on
the whole trade of France within her grasp, in contempt of all forms of commencing
hostilities, required by the usage of nations. It was next seen in the extensive
depredations on the trade of neutrals, particularly of the Dutch, in defiance not only of
the law of nations, but of the most explicit stipulations of treaty. The losses of that
single nation, within the first two years of the war, amounted to several millions
sterling.‡ The Dutch, by their ambassador at London, remonstrated. The British
ambassador at the Hague was instructed to enter into explanations. Among these it
came out,* for the first time, that Great Britain meant, notwithstanding the
admonitions of prudence as well as of justice, to deny the right of neutrals to carry on
with her enemies any trade beyond the precise trade usually carried on in time of
peace.

The origin of this novel principle deserves a more particular development. The
English Government had no sooner made war on the French commerce, than the


Dutch began to avail themselves of their neutral and stipulated rights to enter into it;
particularly the commerce of the colonies, both to their own ports, and to French
ports. The English immediately made war on this commerce, as indeed they did on the
commerce to Spain, Portugal, and other countries. The Dutch vessels were even
pillaged on the high seas, and their seamen very badly treated. In the years 1757 and
1758 alone, the number of vessels captured and pillaged amounted to no less than
three hundred; and the damages were estimated at eleven millions of florins, between
five and six millions of dollars. The Dutch appealed to their treaties with England
[those in 1674 and 1675] which made enemy’s goods free in their ships, contraband
only excepted, and the Dutch trade free from and to the enemy’s ports, and from one
enemy’s port to another. The English were driven to the pretext, that the treaty of
1674 said only that the liberty of trade should extend to all merchandizes which were
transported in time of peace, those of contraband excepted; and was, therefore, not
applicable to the colonial trade in time of war. Besides that the time of peace, if it had
been any thing more than a mode of expressing the entire freedom of commerce,
could refer only to the kind of merchandizes, not to the ports or channels of trade, the
Dutch were able to appeal to the declaratory treaty of 1675, which stipulated an
unlimited freedom of trade from and to ports of enemies, without saying any thing as
to times of peace. This admitting no reply, the English found no refuge but in the
pretext, that the Dutch vessels, being engaged in the colonial trade, were to be
considered as French vessels. This lucky thought eluded the stipulation that free ships
make free goods, as well as that which embraced the right of trade on the coasts and
with the colonies of enemies. It was alledged also, but with little seeming reliance on
such an argument, that the commerce with the French islands was not known in 1674,
and therefore could not be comprised in that treaty. These pretexts being very little
satisfactory to the Dutch, the Province of Holland, the chief sufferer, talked of
reprisals. The English answer is in Tindal’s Cont., vol. 9, p. 577-8. Undertaking to
decide on a constitutional question within an independent nation, they said, if the
Province of Holland, which had no authority, should fit out ships, they would be
treated as pirates; and if the States General should do it, it would be taken as a
declaration of war. Such was the birth of this spurious principle.

Being avowed, however, on the part of the Government, it was to be expected that it
would have its effect on the courts of admirality. As the decisions of these, during that
period, were never reported, the best knowledge of them is to be gathered from
references incidentally made to them, in the proceedings of other British courts, and
in the proceedings of the high court of admiralty, since the reports of them have been
published. The most precise information which has been obtained through the first
channel, appears in the case of Berens vs. Rucker, before the court of King’s bench,
reported in 1 Blackstone, p. 313. This was the case of a Dutch ship which had taken in
sugars at sea, off the Island of St. Eustatius, brought along side of her by French boats
from a French island; which ship was captured in 1758, on her return with that cargo
to Amsterdam. Lord Mansfield in pronouncing on the case in 1760, expressed himself
as follows:

“This capture was certainly unjust. The pretence was that part of this cargo was put on
board off Saint Eustatius by French boats from a French island. This is now a settled
point by the lords of appeals to be the same thing as if they had been landed on the


Dutch shore, and then put on board afterwards, in which case there is no color for
seizure. The rule is, that if a neutral ship trades to a French colony with all the
privileges of a French ship, and is thus adopted and naturalized, it must be looked
upon as a French ship, and is liable to be taken—not so, if she has only French
produce on board, without taking it at a French port, for it may be purchased of
neutrals.”

Here the ground of capture must be distinctly noted. It is not that the trade, as a trade
allowed in war only, was unlawful, and thence incurred a forfeiture of both ship and
cargo; the ground and measure of forfeiture, which are now alleged. The vessel is
condemned on the ground, or presumption, that it had, by adoption, been made the
property of the enemy; whilst the cargo is not liable to condemnation, if not proved to
be enemy’s property. In other words, the vessel is, in spite of the fact, presumed from
the mere circumstance of navigating in a French channel, to be French property; and
the cargo, although of French production, and found in a vessel looked upon as
French, is notwithstanding these considerations, open to the presumption that it might
be neutral property.

This shews only that the Herculean principle was at that time in its cradle; and that
neither the extent of its powers, nor the wonders which it was to be called to perform,
were at first understood. Its capacities were to be learnt and applied, as they might be
unfolded by time and occasions. At that time, neutral vessels being admitted into new
channels of French trade by grants of special licences to the vessels, the occasion was
thought to be best answered with respect to the vessels, by the presumption, or rather
the fiction, that they were French vessels; and with respect to the neutral cargo, as it
did not fall precisely under the presumption applied to the vessels, it was left to
escape until further time and occasions should teach the other shapes and uses, of
which the innovation was susceptible.

These shapes and uses soon began to disclose themselves: for it appears from the
references made in the case of the Providentia,* tried before Sir W. Scott in 1799, that
French West India produce, conveyed by neutrals from Monte Christi, a Spanish
neutral port, was, in the progress of the war of 1756, condemned, on the pretext that
the intervention of a neutral port, was a fraudulent evasion of the rule which
condemned the trade with a French port; notwithstanding the previous rule of the
Lords of appeal, according to which the landing or even trans-shipment of such
produce, at a neutral port, neutralized the trade, and made it lawful.

There is some obscurity, it must be owned, as to the principle on which a neutral trade
with the French colonies was condemned, after the discontinuance of special licences;
it being sometimes stated in the arguments referring to that period, that the
condemnation was founded on the principle, that the trade was virtually or adoptively,
a French trade; and sometimes, that it was founded on the general principle that it was
a trade not open in time of peace. Certain it is, that the original principle was that of a
virtual adoption, this principle being commensurate with the original occasion; and
that, as soon as this original principle was found insufficient to reach the new
occasions, a strong tendency was seen towards a variation of the principle, in order to
bring the new occasions within its reach.


It is remakarble that, notwithstanding the broad principle asserted by the cabinet
through its diplomatic organ at the Hague, which interdicted to neutrals every trade
not allowed to them in time of peace, the courts of Admiralty not only limited the
principle at first, and hesitated afterwards to extend it, in the manner which has been
seen; but never undertook to apply it to the coasting trade; though so strongly marked
as a peace monopoly, and therefore so clearly within the range of the principle; nor
does it appear, even, that the principle was applied to the trade with the Spanish
colonies, after Spain joined in the war, notwithstanding the rigorous monopoly under
which they are known to be generally kept, in time of peace.

It is still more important to remark, as a proof of the inconsistency always resulting
from false principles, and the indulgence of unjustifiable views, that the English
themselves, if the Annual Register is to be believed, were actually trading by means
of flags of truce equivalent to licences, both directly with the French islands, and
indirectly through Monte Christi, during the very period when they were confiscating
the property of neutrals carrying on precisely the same trade, in the same manner.

Such is the state of the question as presented during the war of 1756. The next enquiry
relates to the war of the American Revolution, or the French war of 1778.

Here it is conceded on the British side, that the new principle was, throughout that
period, entirely suspended. On the other side, it may be affirmed, that it was
absolutely abandoned.

One proof is drawn from the course of decisions, in the British high court of
Admiralty, by Sir James Marriott, the predecessor of Sir Wm. Scott.

The first volume only of his decisions has yet found its way to this country. In that are
contained the cases referred to below;* all of which are adjudged on the principle, that
the coasting trade, and of course every other branch of trade, not allowed to foreigners
by a nation at peace, and which may be opened to neutral foreigners by such nation
when at war, are lawful trades.

Although some of the ships, in these cases, were Danish, and others Dutch, and
consequently within the stipulations of treaties which have been heretofore cited; yet
there is no appearance that the Judge was guided in his decisions by that authority;
nor is it in the least probable, that they will now be explained by a resort to it. But
should such an attempt be made, it could be of no avail; because, among the cases,
there are two, one of a Lubeck and the other of a Prussian vessel, which could be
decided by no other rule than the general law of nations; there being no British treaty,
with either Prussia or Lubeck, applicable to the question. There is another case, a
colonial one too, decided 21st January, 1779, in which the law of nations must of
necessity have been the sole guide. It was that of a French ship, bound from St.
Domingo to Nantz. The general cargo, as well as the vessel, were condemned as
enemies’ property; reserving the question concerning the claims of considerable
value, made by two passengers as neutrals, the one asserting himself to be a subject of
Bohemia, the other of Tuscany. The articles claimed were ultimately condemned as
enemies’ property; without the slightest allusion to the illegality of a neutral trade


between a belligerent country and its colonies; which, if then maintained, as it is now,
would at once have put an end to the claims.

It is strictly and incontrovertibly just, then, to say, that these decisions maintain the
law of nations as asserted in this investigation; and abandon and renounce it, as
asserted in the decisions of the same court, under its present Judge. During the war of
1778, the Judge had no guide whatever in prize cases, turning on this question, but the
law of nations. Neither treaties, nor acts of parliament, nor any known orders of
council, interposed any special rule controuling the operation of that law. That law,
consequently, was the sole rule of the decisions; and these decisions, consequently,
complete evidence of the law, as then understood and maintained by the court: and let
it be repeated, that if such was the law in the case of the coasting trade, it was equally
the law as to every other channel of trade, shut in peace, and laid open in war.

These decisions were, indeed, made by the high court of Admiralty, and not by the
Lords Commissioners of Appeal, the authority in the last resort, on such subjects. But
this consideration does not impeach the inference drawn from the decisions; which
having not been reversed, nor appealed from, are fair evidence for the purpose to
which they are applied. It is impossible to account for an omission to enter appeals,
where the captors were in their own country, and must have had the best counsel,
without supposing that the appeals afforded not the smallest chance of a more
favorable decision.

But as a further and more unexceptionable proof that the principle was abandoned, it
is stated by Sir Wm. Scott himself, that “in the case of the Verwagtig,* (a vessel
trading between France and Martinique during the war of 1778) and in many other
succeeding cases, the Lords of Appeal decreed payment of freight to the neutral ship
owner.” This, it must be observed, is a case of colonial trade; and a colonial trade of
the most exclusive kind in time of peace; a trade between the colony and the parent
country.

To these authorities, an explanation equally singular and unsatisfactory is opposed. It
was understood, says Sir William Scott, that “France in opening her colonies, during
the war [of 1778] declared that this was not done with a temporary view relative to the
war, but on a general and permanent purpose of altering her colonial system, and of
admitting foreign vessels, universally and at all times, to a participation of that
commerce. Taking that to be the fact, (however suspicious its commencement might
be, during the actual existence of the war,) there was no ground to say that neutrals
were not carrying on a commerce, as ordinary as any other in which they could be
engaged; and therefore, in the case of the Verwagtig, and many other succeeding
cases, the lords decreed payment of freight to the neutral ship owner.”

At what particular time, and in what particular terms, this important declaration by
France was made, is not mentioned; nor has any such declaration been discovered by
a search which has been carried through all the French codes, and such of the annals
of the time, as were most likely to contain it; and without some further account of this
“declaration,” or this “profession” on the part of France, as it is elsewhere called in
Rob. Reports, it is impossible to decide on the precise character and import of it.


But supposing the fact, as it was taken to be, how account for so unexampled an
instance of blind confidence by Great Britain, in the sincerity of an enemy, always
reproached by her with the want of sincerity; and on an occasion too, so peculiarly
suspicious, as that of a profession at the commencement of war, calculated to disarm
Great Britain of a most precious branch of her rights of war?

If her suspension of the new principle is not to be explained by an intentional return to
the established law of nations; and the explanation of the fact lies in the alternative
between her respect for a suspicious declaration of France, made in the suspicious
crisis of a war, more than any other charged by her on the perfidious ambition of
France; and her respect for those prudential motives which her own situation may
have suggested for abandoning, rather than renewing, the attempt to maintain such a
principle; it will not be easy to avoid preferring the explanation drawn from the
following review of her situation.

However bold it may have been in Great Britain to advance and act upon the new
principle in the war of 1756, it has been seen that she went but a small part of the
length of it; and with an evident desire to make the innovation as little conspicious
and obnoxious as was consistent with her object. In this caution she was probably
influenced by a regard, not only to the progress of opinion in Europe in favor of
neutral rights; but particularly to the King of Prussia, whose friendship she courted,
and who was known to be a patron of those rights. His dispute with Great Britain,
produced by her seizure of Prussian vessels in the preceding war, and by his seizing in
return, the Silesian funds mortgaged to Great Britain, is well known. The issue of this
dispute has been represented as a complete triumph of the belligerent claims of Great
Britain, over the pretensions of the neutral flag. The fact, however, is, that she was
obliged to redeem the Silesian debt from the attachment laid on it, by paying to
Prussia the sum of 20,000 pounds sterling, as an indemnity for the prizes made of
Prussian ships.*

At the commencement of the war of 1778, the public opinion had become still more
enlightened and animated on the subject of neutral rights. The maritime success of
Great Britain in the war of 1756, had alarmed, and the abuses of her power had
sharpened the feelings of every commercial nation. Champions had started up all over
Europe, maintaining with great learning and strong reasoning, the freedom of the seas,
and the rights of the neutral flag. The principle that free ships make free goods, more
especially employed a variety of very able pens; and had made a rapid progress. Other
principles, the offspring or auxiliaries of this, and equally adverse to the maritime
claims of Great Britain, were also gaining partizans. In a word, that state of
fermentation in the public mind was prepared, which being nourished by the example
and the policy of France, enabled Russia, in concert with France, to unite and arm all
the maritime nations of Europe, against the principles maintained by Great Britain. To
these discouraging circumstances in the situation of Great Britain, it must be added,
that the cause in which she was fighting against her colonies, who had separated from
her, was unpopular; that their coalition with her enemies, weakening her and
strengthening them, had a double effect in depressing her; and that it happened, as
was to be foreseen, that the fleets and cruisers brought against her, and the distress to
which her own West Indies were reduced by her inability to supply their wants, made


it questionable, whether she might not lose, rather than gain, by renewing the
principle which she had formerly asserted. Early in that war, Mr. Burke, in the House
of Commons, exclaimed, “we are masters of the sea, no farther than it pleases the
house of Bourbon to permit.”

The effect of this state of things, in tempering the policy and pretensions of Great
Britain during the war of 1778, is attested by a series of her public acts too tedious to
be here inserted, but which may be seen in Hennings’ collection.

But to whatever causes, the relinquishment by Great Britain of the new principle, is to
be ascribed, the fact of the relinquishment remains the same; and that it did not
proceed from any declaration made by France, that she had permanently abolished her
colonial monopoly, is fully demonstrated by the following considerations.

The fact is, that such a declaration, or such an abolition by France, however
satisfactory the evidence of it might be to the British Cabinet, could have no legal
effect on the decisions of a Court, without some notification of instruction which is
not pretended; and which is sufficiently contradicted, by the guarded terms used by
Sir William Scott in speaking of the declaration. And that the then judge of the court,
Sir James Mariott, was not in fact influenced in his decisions, either by the declaration
of France itself, or by any instruction of his own government founded on such a
declaration, is put beyond the possibility of doubt, not only by the want of reference
thereto in the decisions, but by an acknowledgment made by Sir William Scott, in the
case of the Emanuel in 1799, (1 Rob., p. 253;) the case of a neutral vessel carrying
from one Spanish port to another, salt owned by the king of Spain, then at war with
Great Britain. “With respect to authorities (says he) it has been much urged, that in
three cases, this war, the Court of Admiralty has decreed payment of freight to vessels
so employed: and I believe that such cases did pass, under an intimation of the
opinion of the very learned person who preceded me, in which the parties acquiesced,
without resorting to the authority of a higher tribunal.” If the decisions of Sir James
Mariott in the war of 1778, had been guided by the declaration of France, and not by
the law of nations, it is evident, as that delcaration was inapplicable to the war of
1793, and had even been falsified on the return of peace in 1783, as stated by Sir
William Scott himself, that the opinion intimated by Sir James Mariott with respect to
cases, Spanish too, and not French cases, in the beginning of the war of 1793, could
have no other basis than the principle, that according to the law of nations taken by
itself, the trade of neutrals on belligerent coasts was a rightful trade.

Secondly. Were it admitted that a declaration by France had been so made and
communicated, as to become a rule binding on the admiralty court, it is clear that the
rule must have been restricted to cases of trade with the French colonies, and could
have no effect on those of a trade with Spanish or Dutch colonies, whose governments
had made no such declaration as is attributed to France: yet it is not pretended, nor is
it known, that any distinction was made by the British courts, between the former and
latter cases. The principle in question seems to have been equally renounced in all.*

Thirdly. The alleged change in the system of France was restricted to her colonies. It
is not pretended that any permanent change was either made, or declared in the


system of her coasting trade. But the decisions of the British court above cited, relate
principally to the coasting trade. The principle then must have been drawn, not from
the alleged change of France, but from the law of nations: and if the law of nations
authorized in the judgment of the court, a coasting trade shut in peace and opened in
war, it must have authorized, in the same judgment, the colonial and any other trade
shut in peace and opened in war.

It is an inevitable conclusion, therefore, not only that the trade of neutrals to
belligerent coasts and colonies, was sanctioned by the British courts, throughout the
war of 1778, but that the sanction was derived from the law of nations; and,
consequently, that the new principle, condemning such a trade, was not merely
suspended under the influence of a particular consideration which ceased with that
war, but was, in pursuance of the true principle of the law of nations, judicially
abandoned and renounced.

Passing on to the war of 1793, it appears, however, that the policy of the British
government, yielding to the temptations of the crisis, relapsed into the spirit and
principle of her conduct towards neutral commerce, which had been introduced, in the
war of 1756.

The French revolution which began to unfold itself in 1789, had spread alarm through
the monarchies and hierarchies of Europe. Forgetting former animosities, and rival
interests, all the great powers on the continent were united, either in arms or in
enmity, against its principles and its examples: some of them, doubtless were
stimulated, also, by hopes of acquisition and aggrandizement. It was not long before
the British government began to calculate the influence of such a revolution, on her
own political institutions; as well as the advantages to which the disposition of
Europe, and the difficult situation of her ancient rival and enemy might be turned.
War was, indeed, first declared by the French government; but the British government
was, certainly, the first that wished it, and never perhaps entered into a war against
France, with greater eagerness, or more sanguine hopes. With all Europe on her side,
against an enemy in the pangs of a revolution, no measure seemed too bold to be
tried; no success, too great to be expected.

One of her earliest measures was accordingly that of interdicting all neutral supplies
of provisions to France, with a view to produce submission by famine.*

The project, however, had little other effect, than to disgust those most interested in
neutral commerce, and least hostile to France. This was particularly the case with the
United States, who did not fail to make the most strenuous remonstrances against so
extraordinary a proceeding. The correspondence of their Secretary of State with the
British plenipotentiary, (Mr. Hammond), and of Mr. Pinckney the American
plenipotentiary with Lord Grenville, the British Secretary of State, are proofs of the
energy with which the innovation was combated, and of the feebleness and fallacy
with which it was defended. The defence was rested on a loose expression of Vattel.
Bynkershoeck, who had not altogether got rid of the ideas of the former century, and
by whom Vattel probably was misled, could have furnished a still stronger authority.†


The next experiment of depredation on neutral commerce was directed,
notwithstanding the former abandonment of the principle, and the continuance of the
abandonment into the early cases of the war‡ of 1793, against that carried on with the
possessions of France in the West Indies. This experiment too fell with peculiar
weight on the United States. For some time the irregularities went on, without any
known instructions from the government reviving the abandoned principle; but
without the licentious excesses which followed.

As early, however, as November 6, 1793, instructions were issued, which struck
generally at the neutral commerce with the French West Indies. That of the United
States was the principal victim. The havoc was the greater, because the instructions
being carried into operation before they were promulged, took the commerce by
surprize.

This instruction of November 6th, 1793, was addressed to the commanders of ships of
war, and to privateers having letters of Marque against France, in the following terms:

“That they shall stop and detain all ships laden with goods the produce of any colony
belonging to France, or carrying provisions or other supplies for the use of any such
colony, and shall bring the same with their cargoes to legal adjudication in our courts
of admiralty.”

In some respects this instruction went farther than the new principle asserted by Great
Britain; in others it fell short of that principle.

It exceeded the principle in making the produce of a French colony, although owned
by neutrals, and going from a neutral port where it might have been regularly
naturalized, the criterion of the trade. The principle would have extended only to
produce exported immediately from the colony, in a trade not permitted in time of
peace.

Again, the principle was not applicable to an immediate trade from certain ports* and
places in the colonies, authorized by permanent regulations antecedent to the war. The
instruction extends to any colony, and consequently violates a trade where it was
permitted and customary before the war.

On the other hand it falls short of the principle, in as much—1, as it spares articles
directly exported from, though not the produce of, the colonies—2, as it does not
affect the coasting trade of France, and other branches of French trade, laid open in
time of war, on account of the war.

With these mitigations, however, the instruction had a sweeping operation on the
neutral commerce with the French colonies, carried on chiefly from the United States.

The resentment produced by it, and which was doubled by the ensnaring concealment
of the instruction, appeared not only in the outcry of the suffering merchants, but in
the discussions and proceedings of the government. Important restrictions on the
commerce of Great Britain were agreed to by one branch of the Congress, and
negatived by a single vote in the other. A sequestration of British funds and effects in


the United States was proposed and strongly supported. And an embargo withholding
supplies essential to the subsistence of the British West Indies, actually passed into a
law, and remained in force for some time. These measures, at length, gave way to the
mission of a plenipotentiary extraordinary to the British court, which terminated in the
treaty of 1794.

The British government, in the mean time, aware of the powerful tendency of such
depredations, to drive the United States into a commercial, if no other warfare, against
her, prudently retreated from the ground taken by this instruction, as early as the 8th
of January, 1794, when she revoked the instruction to her cruisers, of November 6th,
1793, and subtituted the following:

“1. That they shall bring in for lawful adjudication all vessels with their cargoes, that
are loaded with goods the produce of the French West India Islands, and coming
directly from any port of the said islands to any port in Europe.”

“2. That they shall bring in for lawful adjudication, all ships with their cargoes, that
are loaded with goods the produce of the said islands, the property of which goods
shall belong to subjects of France, to whatsoever ports the same may be bound.”

“3d. That they shall seize all ships that shall be found attempting to enter any port of
the said islands that is, or shall be, blockaded by the arms of his majesty or his allies,
and shall send them in with their cargoes for adjudication, according to the terms of
the 2d article of the former instructions, bearing date the 8th day of June, 1793.”

“4th. That they shall seize all vessels laden wholly or in part with naval or military
stores, bound to any port of the said islands, and shall send them into some convenient
port belonging to his majesty, in order that they, together with their cargoes, may be
proceeded against according to the rules of the law of nations.”

As the three last articles cannot be regarded as any relaxation or re-modification of the
instructions of November, 1793, since they relate only to principles well known to
have been long enforced by Great Britain, as a part of the law of nations, it is not easy
to discern the motive to them. The only effect of the articles, as an enumeration and
definition of belligerent rights, in certain branches of trade, seems to be, to beget
perplexing questions with respect to these rights, in the branches of trade pretermitted.

The material article is the first. It varies the preceding instructions in three respects:
1st, in substituting “the French West India islands” for “any colony of France;” of
which there are some not islands, and others not West India islands: 2d, in limiting the
seizure, to produce “coming directly” from any port of the said islands: 3d, in the very
important limitation of the seizure, to vessels bound from those islands to any port in
Europe.

By these limitations it was apparently, intended to take the direct trade from the
French West Indies to the United States, out of the operation of the order of 1793:
and, probably also, the trade from the United States to the West Indies; leaving the
trade to Europe, from the French West Indies, a prey to British cruisers. Whether it


was also meant, as seems to be implied, that the neutral trade from Europe to the
French West Indies was to be undisturbed, is a distinct question. This question was
actually raised under the ambiguity of the instruction, and decided, not without some
marks of self distrust, by Sir Wm. Scott, in the case of a trade from France herself to a
West India colony.*

The explanation of this change in the instructions of the British Government is given,
by the Reporter of Sir Wm. Scott’s decisions, in the following passage extracted from
the appendix to 4 Rob., p. 4: “The relaxations that have since [the instructions of
November 6, 1793] been adopted, have originated chiefly in the change that has taken
place in the trade of that part of the world, since the establishment of an independent
Government on the continent of America. In consequence of that event, American
vessels had been admitted to trade in some articles, and on certain conditions, with the
colonies both of this country and of France. Such a permission had become a part of
the general commercial arrangements, as the ordinary state of their trade in time of
peace. The commerce of America was therefore abridged by the foregoing
instructions, and debarred of the right generally ascribed to neutral trade in time of
war, that it may be continued with particular exceptions, on the basis of its ordinary
establishment. In consequence of representations made by the American Government,
to this effect, new instructions to our cruizers were issued, 8th January, 1794,
apparently designed to exempt American ships trading between their own country and
the colonies of France.”

One remark suggested by this explanation is, that if it be a just defence of the orders
of January, 1794, it is a severe imputation on those of November, 1793; for the sole
reason which is stated, as requiring this revocation of the orders of 1793, was in
existence at the date of those rigorous orders; and ought, therefore, to have prevented
them. Yet they were not only not prevented, but were permitted to have a secret and
extensive operation on the American commerce. Nor does it appear, that in any of the
decisions on the captures made within that period, conformably to the instructions, but
contrary, as is here admitted, to the law of nations, which, on the British principle,
authorized the American commerce, at least as far as it had been actually enjoyed
with the French, in time of peace, the court ever undertook to modify the instructions;
as is alleged to have been done, in the war of 1778, in consequence of the professions
of France that she had opened her colonial ports, generally, to the permanent trade of
other nations.

The explanation calls for two other remarks. The first is, that the instruction goes
beyond the reason assigned for it. The reason assigned is, that the trade between the
United States and the French islands had, by the permission of France, become “the
ordinary state of their trade in time of peace.” Now so far as this was the fact, the
trade is expressly and truly stated, in the explanation itself, to have been limited to
“some articles,” and “on certain conditions.” But the instruction is admitted to have
been designed to exempt, without any such limitations, American ships trading
between their own country and the colonies of France.

The second remark is, that it is not a fact, that the representations of the American
Government were made to the effect here stated; namely, that the instructions of 1793


debarred them of the right of trading with the French colonies in time of war,
according to the ordinary state of the trade permitted to them in time of peace. The
representations of the American Government recognized no such principle, nor
included any such complaint; as is proved by official documents* on the subject.

A third remark might be added. If the ordinary permissions of France to trade with her
colonies, was a good reason for exempting the trade of the United States from the
order of November, 1793, the exemption ought to have been coextensive with the
permissions; and, consequently, to have embraced the neutrals of Europe, who
enjoyed the same permissions as the United States; instead of being restricted to the
latter.

One is really at a loss, which most to admire, the hasty and careless facility with
which orders proceed from the Government of a great and an enlightened nation,
laying prostrate the commerce and rights of its friends; or the defective and
preposterous explanations given of such orders, by those who undertake to vindicate
or apologize for them.

But whatever may have been the origin, or the intention of the second orders of 1794,
revoking the restraints imposed by those of 1793, on the United States; whilst they
suffered those restraints to continue, in great part at least, on other nations; two
consequences resulted, which seem not to have been taken sufficiently into foresight.

One of them was, that the nations of Europe, excluded from the trade not forbidden to
the United States, were not a little soured by the distinction; and which, very possibly,
may have contributed to the revival of the sympathies which brought about the armed
neutrality of 1800.

The other was, the vast growth of the carrying trade of the United States, which
supplied all parts of Europe, with the produce of the West Indies, and without
affording to Great Britain any of the profits of an entrepot.

The development of these consequences could not fail to awaken the attention of the
British Government, and is the best key to the instruction which was issued January
25, 1798; and which was extended to the possessions of Spain and Holland, then
united with France against Great Britain.

It revoked the instructions of January, 1794, reciting as the consideration which
rendered the alteration expedient, “the present state of the commerce of Great Britain,
as well as that of neutral countries;” and in lieu thereof, the following was issued:

“That they should bring in for lawful adjudication, all vessels with their cargoes, that
are laden with goods, the produce of any island or settlement belonging to France,
Spain, or the United Provinces, and coming directly from any port of the said islands
or settlements, to any port in Europe, not being aport of this kingdom, nor a port of
that country, to which such ships, being neutral ships, shall belong.” The residue of
the articles merely extend to the islands and settlements of France, Spain, and
Holland, the three last articles in the instructions of January, 1794.


The effect of this new change in the instructions was, to sanction a direct trade from
all the French islands, as well as from those in the West Indies, and also from the
French settlements which were not islands, with a like sanction, to a like trade, from
the islands and settlements of the other enemies of Great Britain; to extend to neutrals
in Europe, the enjoyment of this trade, with a refusal to the American States, of the
direct trade, from those islands and settlements to such European neutrals; and
finally, to permit to these States, as well as to the neutrals of Europe, a direct trade
from the hostile islands and settlements to Great Britain herself.

The explanation attempted by the reporter, Dr. Robinson, in his appendix to the 4th
vol., p. 4-5, is, that “In consequence of the relaxation [in 1794] of the general
principle in favor of American vessels; a similar liberty of resorting to the colonial
market, for the supply of their own consumption, was conceded to the neutral States
of Europe, a concession rendered more reasonable by the events of war, which, by
annihilating the trade of France, Spain, and Holland, had entirely deprived the States
of Europe of the opportunity of supplying themselves with the articles of colonial
produce in those markets.”

With regard to the permission to all neutrals to convey the produce of the enemies’
colonies, directly to British ports, he is silent.

From a summary, however, of the discussions which had taken place on cases before
the Lords of Appeal, as it is given in the appendix to 4 Rob., p. 6, an explanation of
this part of the regulation, might be easily collected, if it were not otherwise
sufficiently obvious. Among the arguments used for so construing the last order of
1798, as to justify a Danish vessel in trading from a Spanish colony, to a neutral
country, to which the vessel did not belong; it is observed, “that, originally, the
pretension to exclude all neutrals, was uniformly applied on the part of the
belligerent; by which the effect of reducing such settlements for want of supplies,
became a probable issue of the war; now, since the relaxations have conceded to
neutral merchants the liberty of carrying thither cargoes of innoxious articles, and also
of withdrawing the produce of the colony, for the purpose of carrying it to their own
ports; now, to restrict them from carrying such cargoes directly to the ports of other
neutral States, becomes a rule apparently capricious in its operation, and one, of
which the policy is not evident. From the northern nations of Europe, no
apprehensions are to be entertained of a competition injurious to the commercial
interests of our own country. To exclude them for this mode of traffic [that is of
trafficking directly from such colonies to other neutral countries] in the produce of the
enemy’s colonies, is to throw a farther advantage into the hands of American
merchants, who can, with greater ease, import it first into their own country, and then,
by re-exportation, send it on to the neutral nations of Europe.”

No other key is wanted to let us into the real policy of the orders of 1798; which
placed the neutral nations of Europe, and the United States on the same footing, by
extending the rights of the former, and thereby abridging the advantages of the latter.
This change of “the actual state of the commerce of this country (G. B.) as well as that
of neutral countries” was expedient for two purposes: It conciliated the Northern
nations, then perhaps listening to a revival of the armed neutrality, and from whom


“no apprehensions were to be entertained” of an injurious competition with the
commercial interests of Great Britain; and at the same time, it so far took the
advantages of re-exportation out of the hands of the American merchants, from whom
such a competition, probably was apprehended.

But a mere adjustment of the balance between neutrals in their advantageous trade
with the enemy colonies, did not answer all the purposes which were to be consulted.
It gave Great Britain herself, no share of the forbidden fruit. She took at once,
therefore, the determination, whilst she would permit none of the neutral merchants of
any country to carry on this colonial trade of her enemies with another neutral
country, to authorize them all to carry it on with herself; disguising, as well as she
could, the policy of making herself the centre and thoroughfare of so extensive a
branch of profit, under the general expediency of changing “the state of commerce
both British and neutral” as it had resulted from her regulations of 1794; and
avoiding, as much as she could, to present to notice, the palpable inconsistency of
making herself a party to a trade with her colonial enemies, at the very moment when
she was exerting a belligerent pretension, having no other basis, than the probable
reduction of them, by suppressing all trade whatever with them.

This subject is too important not to be a little further pursued. Unpleasant as the task
is, to trace into consequences, so selfish and so abounding in contradictions, the use
made by Great Britain of the principle assumed by her, the development is due to
truth and to the occasion. It will have the important effect, at the same time, of
throwing further light on the checkered scene exhibited by the admiralty
jurisprudence of Great Britain.

It must be added then, that the commercial policy for which she employs her new
belligerent principle, is the more apparent from two subsidiary pretensions, as new, as
they are at variance with the maritime rights of neutral nations.

The object of drawing through her own warehouses and counting-houses, the colonial
trade of her enemies, on its way from the West Indies to the other countries of Europe,
being counteracted by the extensive intercourse between the United States and those
colonies, and by the re-exportation from the United States, of the imported surplus of
colonial produce, the project was adopted, of forcing this trade directly from the West
Indies to, and through Great Britain; 1st, by checking the West India importations into
the United States, and thereby lessening the surplus for re-exportation; 2d, by
embarrassing the re-exportation from the United States; both considerations seconded,
no doubt, by the avidity of her cruizers and by the public interest, supposed to be
incorporated with their success in making prizes; and the first consideration, seconded
also, perhaps, by a desire to give an indirect check to the exportation of contraband of
war from the United States.

In order to check importations, the principle is advanced, that the outward and the
return voyage are to be regarded, as forming but a single voyage; and consequently, if
a vessel is found with an innocent cargo on board, but on her return from a hostile
port, her outward cargo to which, was as contraband of war subject to capture, the


vessel is thereby rendered liable to capture, and the chance for capture, by that means,
doubled.

That this principle is of modern date, can be shewn by more than negative evidence;
and from a source highly respectable. When Sir L. Jenkins was judge of the high court
of admiralty, in the latter period of the 17th century, it was the practice, sometimes for
the king, at others for the commissioners of appeal, to call for his official opinions in
writing, on cases depending in other courts, or diplomatically represented to the
government. These rescripts are valuable, not only as one of the scattered and scanty
materials composing the printed stock of admiralty precedents in Great Britain; but as
the testimony of a man, who appears to have been not undeservedly regarded as an
oracle in his department of law; and to have delivered his opinions with a candor and
rectitude, the more meritorious as he served a sovereign who gave little
encouragement to these virtues, and as he was himself of a temper and principles
sufficiently courtly.

The case of a Swedish vessel, which had conveyed enemy’s goods, having been
seized on her return, with neutral goods, was represented to the government by the
Swedish Resident; and by the Government referred to Sir L. Jenkins, the judge of the
high court of admiralty. His report is so interesting in another respect, as well as that
for which it was required, that it shall be given in his own words:

“The question which I am (in obedience to his Majesty’s most gracious pleasure) to
answer unto, being a matter of fact, I thought it my duty not to rely wholly on my own
memory or observation, but further to inquire of Sir Robert Wiseman, his majesty’s
advocate general; Sir William Turner, his royal highness, the lord high admiral’s
advocate; Mr. Alexander Check, his majesty’s proctor; Mr. Roger How, principal
actuary and register in the high court of admiralty in England; whether they, or any of
them, had observed, or could call to mind, that in the late war against the Dutch, any
one ship otherwise free, (as belonging to some of his majesty’s allies,) having carried
goods belonging to his majesty’s enemies, from one enemy’s port to another, and
being seized (after it had discharged the said goods) laden with the proceeds of that
freight which it had carried and received of the enemy upon the account of the ship’s
owners, had been adjudged prize to his majesty; they all unanimously resolved that
they had not observed, nor could call to mind that any such judgment or
condemnation ever passed in the said court; and to this their testimony I must (as far
as my experience reaches) concur: and if my opinion be (as it seems to be) required, I
do not (with submission to better judgment) know any thing, either in the statutes of
this realm, or in his majesty’s declarations upon occasion of the late war, nor yet in
the laws and customs of the seas, that can (supposing the property of the said proceed
to be bona fide vested in the ship owners his majesty’s allies) give sufficient ground
for a condemnation in this case. And the said advocates (upon the debate I had with
them) did declare themselves positively of the same opinion. Written with my hand
this 6th day of February, 1667.”* Sir L. Jenkins’ works, 2 vol., p. 741.

Here the point is clearly established, that a vessel found with a lawful cargo, on a
return voyage, cannot be affected by the unlawfulness of the cargo immediately


preceding it; and, consequently, that an outward and return voyage, cannot be
considered as but one voyage, or the character of one as transfused into the other.

It is true that, in this case, the cargo in question was not contraband of war, but
enemy’s property. But there is no room for a distinction in the principle applicable to
the two cases. If the two voyages in fact make one and the same voyage in law, an
outward cargo of enemy’s property must authorize capture in the returned voyage as
much as an outward cargo of contraband would authorize it. If the two voyages do not
make one and the same; the contraband of war in one voyage, can no more affect
another voyage, than enemy’s property, in one voyage, can effect another voyage.

It will not have escaped attention that, in the case stated in the report of Jenkins, the
voyage in which enemy’s property had been carried, and which it was imagined might
thence have vitiated the return voyage, was a coasting voyage from one enemy’s port
to another. Yet so immaterial was that circumstance, at that time, that it appears not
even to have been taken into his consideration, much less to have influenced his
opinion. Had it been otherwise, it would indeed have made his decision so much the
stronger against the amalgamation of two voyages, on account of the unlawfulness of
one of them: for on that supposition the first of the two voyages would have been
doubly unlawful, as engaged both in carrying enemy’s property, and in carrying it
from one enemy’s port to another.

But this particular principle is not only of modern date, but of very recent date indeed.
Its history, like that of many other belligerent innovations by Great Britain, is not
unworthy of attention.

In December, 1798, in the case of the Frederick Molke, a Danish vessel that had got
into Havre, then deemed in a state of blockade, and was taken on her way out, August
18th, 1798, it was urged to be like the case of a return voyage, where the cargo of the
outward voyage had been contraband. Sir William Scott admitted that, in the latter
case, “the penalty does not attach on the returned voyage,” but denied the affinity
between the cases: “there is this essential difference,” said he, “that in contraband the
offence is deposited with the cargo whilst in such a case as this, it is continued and
renewed in the subsequent conduct of the ship;”* the act of egress being, according to
him, as culpable as the act of ingress.

In August, 1799, in the case of the Margaretha Magdalena; a vessel returning to
Copenhagen from Batavia, her outward cargo having consisted of contraband goods,
was seized at St. Helena, September, 1798. On the ground, however, that the ship and
cargo were neutral, and that the outward shipment from Copenhagen was contingent
and not absolutely for Batavia, but sent under the management of the master to invest
the proceeds in the produce of Batavia, restitution was decreed by Sir William Scott,
notwithstanding the fact that the contraband “articles were actually sold at Batavia,”
with a remark only, that there was great reason to bring this case to adjudication, as a
case very proper for enquiry. On this occasion the judge made the following
observations: “It is certainly an alarming circumstance in this case, that although the
outward cargo appears to have consisted of contraband goods, yet the principal owner
appears publicly at Copenhagen, and makes oath, “that there were no prohibited


goods on board, destined to the ports of any party now at war.” The master himself
describes the cargo that he carried out as naval stores, and in looking into the invoice
I find that they are there represented as goods to be sold. That being so, I must hold
that it was a most noxious exportation, and an act of very hostile character, to send out
articles of this description to the enemy, in direct violation of public treaties, and of
the duty which the owners owe to their own government. I should consider it as an act
that would affect the neutral in some degree on this returned voyage, for although a
ship on her return is not liable to confiscation for having carried a cargo of
contraband on her outward voyage, yet it would be a little too much to say, that all
impression is done away; because if it appears that the owner had sent such a cargo,
under a certificate obtained on a false oath, that there was no contraband on board, it
could not but affect his credit at least, and induce the court to look very scrupulously
into all the actions and representations of such a person.”*

That the judge was beginning to be a little unquiet under the rule imposed on himself,
not to consider a ship on her return voyage as liable to confiscation for having carried
a cargo of contraband on her outward voyage, is sufficiently visible. He is found,
nevertheless, still submitting to the restriction.

The case of the Immanuel succeeded November 7th, 1799. It is the case of a Hamburg
ship, taken 14th August, 1799, on a voyage from Hamburg to St. Domingo, having in
her voyage touched at Bordeaux, where she sold part of her cargo, and took a quantity
of other articles for St. Domingo. The question was started, whether the stores which
had been discharged at Bordeaux, though originally destined for St. Domingo, were
contraband or not. The inference of the judge was, that they were not of a contraband
nature, at least that they were left ambiguous, and without any particular means
remaining of affording a certainty upon the matter. “If so,” said he, “it is useless to
imagine what the effect of contraband, in such circumstances, would have been. I
shall say no more, than that I incline to think that the discharge of the goods at
Bordeaux would have extinguished their powers of infection. It would be an extension
of this rule of infection, not justified by any former application of it, to say, that after
the contraband was actually withdrawn, a mortal taint stuck to the goods, with which
it had once travelled, and rendered them liable to confiscation, even after the
contraband itself was out of its reach.”*

This was not indeed a return voyage, but one link of an outward voyage. The reason,
however, given why contraband, after being discharged, could not leave a
confiscating taint on the expedition, namely, because itself was out of the reach of
confiscation, is precisely common to the two cases; yet it would seem that the judge is
becoming not a little languid in maintaining the opinion, “that the offence of
contraband is deposited with the cargo.” He now “inclines to think that such would be
the effect.”

February 5, 1800, the case of the Rosalie and Betsey, was that of a ship taken May 31,
1799, on a voyage from the Isle of France, asserted to be to Hamburg. It was made a
question of property, turning on a question of fraud; the fraud in the returned voyage
was held to be reinforced by the fraud in the outward voyage; and that fraud is stated


by Sir William Scott, “as more noxious on account of the contraband nature of
several of the articles of the outward cargo.”

Here contraband in an outward voyage was, in spite of the maxim that its offence was
deposited with the cargo, allowed to have an influence on the character of the
returned voyage. Still it was but an indirect and partial influence. It was held to be an
aggravation only of the fraud, the fraud being the gist of the offence.

In 1800, June 24, occurs the case of the Nancy, Knudson master, a ship taken on a
voyage to Copenhagen from Batavia, whither she had carried contraband of war. The
cargo appears to have been condemned, on the ground of fraud in the papers and
destination, combined with the contraband quality of the outward cargo. The
complexion and weight, however, which the last ingredient had assumed in the mind
of the judge, are seen in the following extract from the judgment pronounced by him:

“But it is said, this is a past transaction, and that in case of contraband, the returned
voyage has not usually been deemed connected with the outward. In European
voyages of no great extent, where the master goes out on one adventure, and receives
at his delivering ports, new instructions and further orders, in consequence of advice
obtained of the state of the markets, and other contingent circumstances, that rule has
prevailed; but I do not think, in distant voyages to the East Indies, conducted in the
manner this has been, the same rule is fit to be applied. In such a transaction, the
different parts are not to be considered as two voyages, but as one entire transaction,
formed upon one original plan, conducted by the same persons, and under one set of
instructions, ab ovo usque ad mala.”* This condemnation of the cargo was confirmed
by the lords of appeal, and the indulgence even allowed with respect to the ship, by
the high court of admiralty, reversed by that superior tribunal.

The existence of contraband in an outward voyage, not only figures more
considerably in this, than in any preceding case; but the judge gets hold of a new
implement of judicial warfare on neutral commerce. In aid of presumptive fraud, of
the alleged continuity of fraud from the outward into the returned voyage, and of the
aggravation given to fraud by the ingredient of contraband in the outward voyage; in
aid of all these, the distance of the voyage, makes for the first time, its appearance. In
the case of the Margaretha Magdalena, the voyage, like this, was a voyage to Batavia.
In the case of the Rosalie and Betsey, the voyage was also into the East Indian seas. In
neither of these cases, the slightest allusion is made to that criterion of right and
wrong. The discovery then may fairly be dated with the case of the Nancy, of no older
date than June, 1800.

But mark the reason, why distant voyages to the East Indies are distinguished from
European voyages of no great extent. It is, because in the latter the master “receives at
his delivering ports, new instructions and further orders, in consequence of advice
obtained of the state of the markets, and other contingent circumstances;” whereas, in
distant voyages to the East Indies, conducted in the manner this has been, the two
voyages are to be considered as one entire transaction, formed upon one original plan,
conducted by the same persons, and under one set of instructions.


If the reason here given for the distinction between distant voyages and voyages of no
great extent, be a good one, it is not easy to see the reason for requiring, in addition to
the distance of the voyage to the East Indies, that it should be conducted in the
manner of this particular voyage; unless indeed it be, as there is too much room to
remark in the decisions of the Judge, with a view to rest every case, as much as
possible, on its own particular circumstances; and thereby avoid the judicial fetters
formed by a chain of definite precedents.

Certain it is, that if the outward and returned voyages are to be taken as one, where
the distance of them is such, that new orders cannot be given, in consequence of new
advices from the foreign ports of delivery, as may be done in voyages of no great
extent; but that the whole business must be executed under one original set of
instructions; every voyage to the East Indies, in whatever manner conducted, must fall
within the rule which determines the outward and returned voyage to be but one
voyage; in other words, that in that extensive branch of neutral commerce, the
outward and returned voyage, making but one, contraband in the outward cargo,
though deposited at its place of destination, is to have the same effect on the returned
voyage, as it would have had on the outward voyage, if actually intercepted on the
outward voyage.

Nay more; the rule must be applicable to every European voyage, of great extent; an
extent so great as to require that the sale of the outward cargo at the ports of delivery,
and the purchase of a return cargo, should be provided for, in the same original
instructions.

In no view can the rule be less applicable to distant voyages between Europe and the
West Indies, than between Europe and the East Indies; nor more to European voyages
than to American voyages to the West Indies, where these are of so great extent as to
require that the returned voyage should be provided for in the same set of instructions
with the outward voyage.

Whether these analogies and inferences entered into the contemplation of the Judge
on this occasion, is an enquiry which may be waived. Nor is it known to the public,
whether any intermediate steps were taken by him, or by the superior tribunal,
between that date and the 24th June, 1803, conducting the policy or opinion of the
cabinet, towards the instructions of this last date. These form, however, a very natural
result of those preliminary ideas, as appears by the tenor of the instructions, which is
as follows:

“In consideration of the present state of commerce, we are pleased hereby to direct the
commanders of our ships of war and privateers, not to seize any neutral vessel which
shall be carrying on trade directly between the colonies of enemies and the neutral
country to which the vessel belongs, and laden with the property of inhabitants of
such neutral country: Provided, that such neutral vessel shall not be supplying, nor
shall have, on the outward voyage supplied, the enemy with any articles of
contraband of war; and shall not be trading with any blockaded port.”


In these instructions we find the principle formally adopted, and the returned cargoes
of West India produce actually obstructed, on their way to the United States, by the
application of the principle, wherever the outward cargo had included contraband. We
find, of course, the West India trade so far forced out of the channel to Europe
through the United States, into such channels to and through Great Britain, as she may
chuse to prescribe.

This being necessarily and obviously the commercial effect of the instructions, it may
fairly be supposed that it corresponds with the intentions of a nation so clear-sighted
in whatever affects her commerce; and, consequently, that the principle on which this
instruction is founded, was assumed as subsidiary to the commercial policy on which
was founded the main principle under investigation.

Another observation, with respect to this instruction, forces itself upon us. It was a
heavy reproach against the instruction of November 6th, 1793, that it was not
promulged until it had for some time been ensnaring, and laying waste, the commerce
of neutral nations with the West Indies. The instruction of June 24, 1803, first found
its way (probably by chance) to public notice in the United States, from the obscure
island of Tortola, in the summer of 1805. It must, then. have been in the pockets of
cruisers, ensnaring and destroying the commerce of this country, as far as that degree
of innovation could have that effect, for a period of about two years The reproach is
heightened, too, by the consideration that the snare, in this case, was successful in
proportion to the respect observed towards former instructions, the faith of which was
violated by the ex post facto operation of that in question. A reparation of the damage
is the least atonement that a just and wise nation can wish to make, for such a trespass
on all the maxims of public morality, as well as of national honor.

The second pretension subsidiary to the commercial policy of instructions, clothed
with the language of belligerent rights, is that of subjecting to capture, colonial
produce, re-exported from a neutral country to countries to which a direct
transportation from the colonies by vessels of the re-exporting country, has been
disallowed by British regulations. The effect of this pretension evidently is, to check
neutral nations, particularly the United States, in the circuitous transportation of West
India produce; and in the same proportion, to force the trade into channels terminating
in British ports. And the effect is the more particularly in her favor, as the re-
exportation of the surplus carried into her ports can be regulated by her own laws, for
her own interests; whilst she will not permit the laws of other countries to regulate the
re-exportation of the surplus carried into their respective ports.

That this pretension, also, is as new as it is arbitrary, will be best seen by a review of
its rise and progress; which will at the same time, as in the other instance, illustrate
the inconstancy and inconsistency of the maritime proceedings of Great Britain
toward other nations.

Prior to the war of 1756, no trace of any such pretension is discovered; and it is
testified by the authority of Lord Mansfield, as already seen, that a principle was,
during that war, judicially settled in opposition to it. A neutral vessel, off the neutral
island of St. Eustatius, had received on board a part of her cargo from French boats,


from a French colony. “This,” says his lordship, “is now a settled point by the lords of
appeals, to be the same thing as if they had been landed on the Dutch shore, and then
put on board afterwards; in which case there is no color for seizure.”

Here the rule was solemnly settled by the highest admiralty tribunal in Great Britain,
that the trans-shipment, off a neutral port, of colonial goods from an enemy’s vessel,
protected the goods from capture, and that where such goods had been landed and
reladen, there was not even a color for seizure.

Notwithstanding this solemn recognition of the neutral right, it was found, as also has
been seen, that French produce exported by neutrals from the neutral port of Monte
Christi, during the war of 1756, was not protected by the rule.

During the war of 1778, the whole claim of disturbing neutral commerce on the
ground of its not being open in peace as well as in war, having been relinquished, the
question could not occur until the war of 1793. And what is not to pass unnoticed, the
first case in which the point fell under judicial observation, appears to have been that
of the Immanuel in November, 1799. During the six preceding years, as may be
inferred from what then fell from the judge, no doubt had existed, that an importation
of colonial produce into a neutral country, converted it into the commercial stock of
the country, with all the rights, especially those of exportation, incident to the produce
or manufactures of the country itself.

It will be most satisfactory to present the opinion of Sir William Scott on that
occasion, in the words of his reporter. “It is argued that the neutral can import the
manufactures of France to his own country, and from thence directly to the French
colony; why not immediately from France, since the same purpose is effected? It is
answered, that it is effected in a manner more consistent with the general rights of
neutrals, and less subservient to the special convenience of the enemy. If a Hamburg
merchant imports the manufactures of France into his own country (which he will
rarely do if he has like manufactures of his own, but which in all cases he has an
incontrovertible right to do) and exports them afterwards to the French colony, which
he does not in their original French character, but as goods which, by importation had
become part of the national stock of his own neutral country, they come to that colony
with all the inconvenience of aggravated delay and expense; so if he imports from the
colony to Hamburg, and afterwards to France, the commodities of the colony, they
come to the mother country under a proportional disadvantage; in short, the rule
presses on the supply at both extremities, and, therefore, if any considerations of
advantage may influence the judgment of a belligerent country in the enforcement of
the right, which upon principle it possesses, to interfere with its enemy’s colonial
trade, it is in that shape of this trade, that considerations of this nature have their chief
and most effective operation.”*

Although the judge is somewhat guarded in his terms, more consistent with the
general rights, and less subservient to the special convenience of the enemy; and
somewhat vague, if not obscure, in his reasoning; yet he admits that an importation of
goods from a belligerent country, into a neutral country, had the effect of making
them a part of the national stock of the neutral country, equally entitled with the


national stock itself, to be exported to a belligerent country. What circumstances
would constitute an importation are not specified; nor does it appear in what light a
mere trans-shipment, at a neutral port, would have been regarded.

The next occasion, on which the judge delivered an opinion on this subject, occurred
in a case before the court, February 5, 1800, and which came before it again on farther
proof, April 29, 1800. It was the case of an American ship taken October 16, 1799, on
a voyage from Marblehead to Bilboa, with a mixed cargo of fish, sugar and cocoa.
The fish, which made the principal part of the cargo, could not enter into the question.
The sugar was part of a whole cargo brought from the Havanna in the same ship, had
been warehoused from some time in June till some time in August, during the repair
of the ship, and was then reshipped. The cocoa, small in quantity, was originally from
a Spanish settlement, and had been trans-shipped from another vessel, lying at
Marblehead, after having been entered at the custom-house. The ship had been
restored by the captors. The property of the cargo was proved. The legality of the
voyage was the sole question. On this question, Sir William Scott pronounced the
following judgment:

“There remains then only the question of law, which has been raised, whether this is
not such a trade as will fall under the principle that has been applied to the
interposition of neutrals in the colonial trade of the enemy. On which it is said that if
an American is not allowed to carry on this trade directly, neither can it [he?] be
allowed to do it circuitously. An American has undoubtedly a right to import the
produce of the Spanish colonies for his own use; and after it is imported bona fide into
his own country, he would be at liberty to carry them on to the general commerce of
Europe: Very different would such a case be from the Dutch cases, in which there was
an original contract from the beginning, and under a special Dutch licence to go from
Holland to Surinam, and to return again to Holland with a cargo of colonial produce.
It is not my business to say what is universally the test of a bona fide importation. It is
argued that it would not be sufficient that the duties should be paid, and that the cargo
should be landed. If these criteria are not to be resorted to, I should be at a loss to
know what should be the test; and I am strongly disposed to hold, that it would be
sufficient that the goods should be landed and the duties paid. If it appears to have
been landed and warehoused for a considerable time, it does, I think, raise a forcible
presumption on that side; and it throws it on the other party to shew how this could be
merely insidious and colorable. There is, I think, reason to believe that the sugar was a
part and parcel of a cargo said to have been brought from a Spanish colony in this
vessel; and if so, the very distribution of the remainder is some proof that they were
not brought with an intention only of sending them on. But I have besides positive
proof in the affidavit of Mr. Asa Hooper, who swears that the duties had been paid for
them. Then the only difficulty remains as to the cocoa, and it is said by one of the
witnesses, and by one only, that it was trans-shipped from another vessel, and that it
had been brought into America only ten days before; but although there is something
of a difficulty arising on this small part of the cargo, yet upon the whole I cannot think
it weighty enough to induce me to send the case across the Atlantic for still further
proof, as to the facts of this recent importation and trans-shipment, or of its having
been transferred to the present proprietors, or of having been exported without a
previous payment of import duties. If it had composed a larger part of the cargo, I


might have deemed it reasonable to have had somewhat more of satisfaction on some
of these points, which do not appear with sufficient certainty to found any legal
conclusion against it. It appears by the collector’s certificate that it had been entered
and imported, and I think that these words are sufficient to answer the fair demands of
the court.”

It must be confessed that we perceive, in this opinion of the judge, somewhat of that
customary forecast, which in tying a knot to bind himself, avoids drawing it too close
to be loosened a little, if there should be occasion. It is, nevertheless, established by
the precedent, that the landing of the goods and paying the duties, is a sufficient test
of the importation; and that the certificate of the collector that “they have been entered
and imported, is all the evidence of the fact, that can fairly be demanded by the
court.”

It might indeed have been expected that the rule stated by Lord Mansfield to have
been settled by the lords of appeals, [which makes the trans-shipment to be equivalent
to the landing and reshipment of goods, and this last procedure to take away all color
for seizure,] would have found its way into the notice of the judge. That rule,
however, cannot be impaired by any thing in his decision for two reasons. One is, that
the further satisfaction, which, if the part of the cargo transshipped had been more
considerable, he might have deemed reasonable on some of the questions; might refer
not to the legality of the voyage, but to the question of property; and it is certainly
agreeable to all the just rules of interpretation so to understand it, rather than to
suppose a purpose in an inferior court, to decide in direct opposition to a rule settled
by the superior court. The other reason is still more conclusive; it is, that on the
supposition of such a purpose in an inferior court, it could have no legal effect in
controuling the rule settled by the superior court, the rule by which alone the conduct
of individuals could be governed.

Such has been the judicial exposition of the neutral right, even under the British
restrictions. The acknowledgment by the cabinet itself, was officially disclosed on the
following occasion, and to the following effect:

The cruisers of Great Britain having seized, and the vice admiralty courts having
condemned, American vessels bound from the United States to the Spanish West
Indies, on the pretext that their cargoes consisted of articles the growth of Spain, then
at war with Great Britain; the American Minister in London, in March, 1801,
represented to the British Government the iniquity of the proceeding, with the
indignation which it inspired: and required that precise instructions should be
dispatched to the proper officers in the West Indies and Nova Scotia, to put an end to
the depredations. The subject was referred to the king’s advocate general, an extract
from whose report was communicated by the British Secretary of State to the
American minister, with information that the king had ordered the doctrine laid down
in the report, to be immediately transmitted to the several inferior judges, as the law
for their future guidance and direction.

The extract containing this doctrine shall be literally recited:


“I have the honor to report, that the sentence of the vice admiralty court appears to be
erroneous, and to be founded in a misapprehension or misapplication of the principles
laid down in the decision of the court of admiralty referred to, without attending to the
limitations therein contained.

“The general principle respecting the colonial trade has in the course of the present
war been to a certain degree relaxed in consideration of the present state of
commerce. It is now distinctly understood, and has been repeatedly so decided by the
high court of appeals, that the produce of the colonies of the enemy may be imported
by a neutral into his own country, and may be re-exported from thence, even to the
mother country of such colony; and in like manner the produce and manufactures of
the mother country may, in this circuitous mode, legally find their way to the
colonies. The direct trade, however, between the mother country and its colonies has
not, I apprehend, been recognized as legal, either by his majesty’s Government or by
his tribunals.

“What is a direct trade, or what amounts to an intermediate importation into the
neutral country, may sometimes be a question of some difficulty. A general definition
of either applicable to all cases, cannot well be laid down. The question must depend
upon the particular circumstances of each case; perhaps the mere touching in the
neutral country, to take fresh clearances, may fairly be considered as a fraudulent
evasion, and as in effect the direct trade; but the high court of admiralty has expressly
decided (and I see no reason to expect that the court of appeal will vary the rule) that
landing the goods and paying the duties in the neutral country, breaks the continuity
of the voyage, and is such an importation as legalizes the trade; altho’ the goods be
reshipped in the same vessel, and on account of the same neutral proprietors, and
forwarded for sale to the mother country.”*

It is impossible to express the law meant to be here laid down in clearer terms, so far
as it determines “that landing the goods and paying the duties” in a neutral country,
legalizes the circuitous trade, even between a belligerent country and its own colonies.
What inferior circumstances would have the same effect are not specified. It is not
decided without a “perhaps” that the mere touching, &c., would be insufficient to
legalize the trade. Nor is the legality even of a direct trade between the mother
country and its colonies, denied in stronger terms than “I apprehend it has not been
recognized.”

Thus stood the admiralty in Great Britain, as announced by British tribunals, and
officially communicated by the British Cabinet to the neutral world. So it had
continued to stand, as a pledge and safeguard to neutrals, conforming themselves to it,
from the dates of those authorities, the last of which is as far back as the spring of the
year 1801.

With what astonishment, then, must the neutral world now learn, from the decision of
Sir William Scott on the 23d July, 1805, that, according to the rule of law just laid
down, after much deliberation, by the lords of appeals, “the circumstances of landing
the goods or securing the duties, do not furnish complete evidence of the termination
of the voyage;” and that without this complete evidence, derived from the original


intention of the importing voyage, the voyage from the neutral port will be treated as
the continuance of the voyage from the colony to the mother country.

This political change in the judicial rules of condemnation, admits no other
satisfactory, than a commercial explanation; for the loss of character, which it
induces, is a greater sacrifice than could be made to the cupidity of cruisers, or the
value of their prizes to the public.

The whole course, indeed, of modifications pursued by the instructions, and by the
decisions of the courts as they appear from day to day, can leave no doubt that the
primary object with Great Britain has been to transfer to herself as large a share as
possible of the commercial advantages yielded by the colonies of her enemies. An
absolute monopoly was embarrassed by the irresistible pretensions of neutral
countries; more especially of the United States, whose neighborhood and habits of
intercourse, together with other considerations, forbade a perseverance in the original
attempt to exclude them. They were accordingly the first of the neutral nations
towards which a relaxation was afforded. The relaxation, after considerable delay,
was extended, by the instruction of 1798, to the neutral nations of Europe. That
instruction was founded on a compromise between the interest and the prudence of
Great Britain. It permitted neutral nations to trade directly with the colonies of her
enemies; without trading in colonial productions with one another; and permitted all
of them to carry those productions directly to Great Britain. This arrangement was
manifestly calculated to limit the importations of each neutral country to the amount
of its own consumption; and consequently to turn the immense residue of colonial
wealth, through neutral vessels, into her own market; whence it might be dispensed,
under her own regulations, to the neutral countries of Europe having no direct
commerce with the West Indies, and even to the belligerent nations whose commerce
with their respective colonies she has as completely destroyed, as she has their
commerce with foreign countries. The arrangement was specious, but proved to be
deceptive. It was expected that the expense and delay of a circuitous trade through the
United States would prevent importations and re-exportations, interfering with the
projected trade directly from the West Indies to herself; and as long as this
expectation was in any degree indulged, the right of re-exportation was admitted,
though reluctantly, both by the Government and the courts. Experience, however,
finally shewed, that the activity, the capital, and the economy employed by the
American traders, overpowered the disadvantages incident to the circuit through the
ports of the United States; and secured to them the profits of supplying Europe with
the colonial productions of her enemies. In proportion as this unforeseen operation
disclosed itself, the commercial jealousy of Great Britain began to take alarm.
Obstructions were to be thrown in the way of importations. Re-exportations were seen
with growing discontent. The idea of continuity, by which two voyages were
consolidated into one, came into vogue. The Vice Admiralty courts, regardless of the
superior decisions in England, would not allow that the landing of a cargo, and paying
the duties, protected it against condemnation. At length appeared the sentence of Sir
Wm. Scott, above cited, carrying into effect the construction of the inferior courts, as
having been deliberately sanctioned by the Lords of Appeal. The doctrine established
by that decision has been followed by other decisions and dicta, at first requiring the
re-exportation, in another ship, then a previous sale of the articles in the neutral


market, then other conditions, one after another, as they were found necessary; till it is
finally understood, that no precautions whatever are to bar the cruisers from
suspecting, nor the courts from scrutinizing, the intention of the original importer, and
that the proof of this intention not to re-export the articles, is to fall on the claimant.
To fill up the measure of judicial despotism, these wanton innovations are now
extended to vessels returning from the belligerent mother countries, as well as to those
going thither from the United States; with the addition of demands of proof never
before heard of in prize courts, on points utterly unknown to the law of nations.

These unexampled and vexatious proceedings manifestly have in view the entire
obstruction of colonial re-exports from the United States; and it would be more
candid in Great Britain, if not more just, to give public notice, at once, that in all such
cases capture and condemnation would be authorized.

Her present system, as subsidiary to the extension of her commerce, will be still
further seen in her concurrent measures, of a type not less extraordinary than that of
any which have preceded them.

According to the instructions issued within the period of the existing war, or to the
received interpretation of them, the permission given to neutrals by those of 1798, to
carry the produce of enemy’s colonies, directly therefrom to Great Britain, has not
been continued. At first view this might appear to be inconsistent with the policy
ascribed to her, in obstructing re-exportations from the United States. The act of
Parliament, of June 27, 1805, however, which has been already noticed, changes this
appearance of departure from that policy, into a new proof, and even an extension of
that policy. By the regulations of that act a direct trade is opened between the British
colonies in the West Indies and those of her enemies; and her enemies themselves are
invited to enter into the trade. Whilst neutrals, therefore, are excluded from carrying
colonial produce directly from the colonies to Great Britain, the commercial views of
Great Britain are answered by the substitution of another channel through her own
colonies; with the additional advantage of a monopoly to her own ships, in the
transportation from her colonies across the Atlantic; and for the sake of this
advantage, or for that of repressing the growth of neutral rivalship, or on both these
accounts, she has been willing to encounter all the reproach of cultivating an avowed
commerce with her enemies, in the very moment of laying new restrictions on that of
neutrals with them.

Further; the act of Parliament, of June 27, 1805, providing for a trade between Great
Britain and the colonies of her enemies, through the medium of free ports in her own
colonies, was preceded by an act of April 10, 1805, authorizing licences to British
subjects, to import, during the war, into Great Britain, in neutral vessels, for their own
or neutral account, from the American colonies of her enemies, most of their
productions; requiring, at the same time, that all sugar and coffee so imported should
be re-exported; and that the value of a certain portion of the imports from such
colonies should be returned in goods and commodities from Great Britain.

Again; in concert with the act of June 27, instructions, founded on another act of
Parliament, were issued, June 29, 1805, authorizing British subjects to export in


neutral vessels to France, Spain, and Holland, a long list of articles, including their
respective colonial productions; and to import therefrom a long list of such articles as
suited her own wants.

To complete the arrangement, in all its forms, it has been officially announced in the
American Gazettes, conformably to a resolution of the British privy council, of
August 3, 1805, that the trade with the settlements and islands belonging to the
enemy, in America and the West Indies, is to be carried on through the medium of the
British free ports in the West Indies, and not otherwise.

The system of Great Britain may, therefore, now be considered as announced to all
the world, without disguise, and by the most solemn acts of her government. Her navy
having destroyed the trade of her enemies, as well between the mother countries and
their colonies, as between the former and neutral countries; and her courts, by putting
an end to re-exportations from neutral countries, reducing the importations into these,
to the mere amount of their own consumption; the immense surplus of productions
accumulating in the American possessions of her enemies can find no outlet but
through the free ports provided for it; nor any other market than the British market,
and those to which she finds it for her interest to distribute it; with a view to which,
she not only allows her enemies to trade with her possessions, but allows her own
subjects to trade with her enemies. And thus, in defiance as well of her treason laws
and of her trade laws, as of the rights of neutrality, under the law of nations, we find
her, in the just and emphatic language of the President, “taking to herself, by an
inconsistency at which reason revolts, a commerce with her own enemy, which she
denies to a neutral, on the ground of its aiding that enemy in the war.”*

But let us return for a moment to the series of instructions of which an historical
review has been taken; and advert to some additional lights in which the judicial
construction and application of them present the conduct of Great Britain.

Prior to the order of November 6, 1793, the general principle forbidding to neutrals a
trade opened to them during the war, must, if it be a principle of the law of nations, as
asserted by Great Britain, have been the rule of Admiralty decisions. Accordingly, it
appears, by 4 Rob. Appendix, p. 12, that condemnations in cases prior to that date
were, in the court of Appeals, made to rest on that principle.

The orders of November 6, 1793, designated for the operation of the principle, the
trade with the colonies of the enemy; as well the trade to, as the trade from, them.

The orders of January, 1794, expressly revoking the orders of November, 1793,
designated for the capture, the trade only from the West India Islands of the enemy,
and bound directly to Europe, only.

The orders of January, 1798, revoking expressly the orders of January, 1794,
designated for capture the trade from the islands or settlements of the enemies, bound
directly to any port in Europe; excepting what might be bound to British ports, or to
the ports of the country to which the neutral vessels should belong.


Without entering into a variety of minute questions growing out of the varied and very
inaccurate expressions in which the orders are penned, several of very great
importance occur, in expounding and applying the rules laid down.

The first question is, whether the first order of 1793, which made no express reference
to the general principle, and which was limited to the colonial branch of the enemy’s
trade, was to be understood as merely a specification of certain cases, to which the
general principle was applicable, leaving the general principle in force as to all
unspecified cases; or whether this specification of certain cases was to be understood
as implying a legalization of cases unspecified.

The question arises, also, under the successive orders, each of them revoking the
orders immediately preceding, whether it was to be understood, that the specification
of certain cases did, or did not, legalize the cases omitted in the same order, but
specified in the orders preceding.

The more obvious construction of the original order, even, seems to be, rather that it
was meant to define the only cases to which the general belligerent claim was to be
applied, than that it was meant merely to notify the claim in those particular cases; a
claim not more requiring notification in those cases, than in the cases not notified.

With respect to the orders of posterior dates, the fair construction implies, that the
belligerent claim was narrowed, first, by all the difference between the orders of 1793
and those of 1794; and finally, by all the difference between the orders of 1794, and
those of 1798.

Taking the whole together under these constructions, the application of the general
principle of capture was restricted by these orders to the trade of neutrals from the
colonies of enemies, directly to ports, other than their own respective ports and the
British ports, and consequently there remained exempt from capture:

1st. The coasting trade, and every branch of trade not colonial.

2d. The trade from any neutral country, to belligerent colonies.

3d. The trade by neutrals from any belligerent country to its own colonies, and to the
colonies of another belligerent country.

4th. The trade between belligerent colonies, whether belonging to the same or to
different belligerent countries.

Applying this rule of implication to the two orders only of 1794 and 1798; and
admitting those of 1793 not to have superseded by implication, the claims to capture
in cases not therein specified, there will be no other exception to the relations or
exemptions just enumerated in favor of neutral commerce, but the coasting trade, and
other trades not colonial, to which Great Britain has applied, or may choose to apply,
the general principle.


In general the high court of admiralty seems, by applying the assumed principle to the
coasting trade, to have pursued that construction of the original order of 1793, which
left the general principle in force as to cases not specified in it; and to have considered
the relaxations in the succeeding orders of 1794 and 1798, as referring solely to the
colonial trade.

There appears, however, at no time to have been any clear and fixed opinion in the
court, with respect to the illegality and penal consequences of the coasting trade.

Few cases are reported, perhaps few have occurred, of discussions relative to this
branch of trade. In 1 Rob., p. 104, the subject is incidentally brought into view, in a
case where a French vessel had been purchased. The doctrine held by the judge is
expressed as follows: “We certainly do allow it, [the purchase,] but only to persons
conducting themselves in a fair neutral manner, &c.; besides, this vessel appears to
have been engaged in the coasting trade of France. The court has never gone so far as
to say, that pursuing one voyage of that kind would be sufficient to fix a hostile
character: but in my opinion, a habit of such trading would. Such a voyage however
must raise a strong degree of suspicion against a neutral claim; and the plunging at
once into a trade so highly dangerous, creates a presumption that there is an enemy
proprietor lurking behind the cover of a neutral name.” Here, not the coasting trade
itself, but the presumption of enemy’s property found in it, is made the ground of
animadversion.

In the case of the Speculation, the same idea presents itself.*

The Emanuel† was itself the case of a coasting trade. In this case the judge descanted
with great energy and rigor, on the manifest illegality of the coasting trade. “Can there
be described,” says he, “a more effective accommodation that can be given to an
enemy during war than to undertake it for him during his own inability?” He did not
however proceed further than to refuse freight on the principle settled by ancient
judgments, that “neutrals are not permitted to trade on freight.” He particularly refers
to the case of the Mercurius, [Lords, March 7, 1795,] in which freight was refused.
Why were not the ships confiscated in these cases? that being laid down in other cases
as included in the penalty for illegal voyages, and actually applied ultimately to cases
of a trade between a colony and the mother country, to which the coasting trade is
strictly analogous; both being trades from one port to another port of the same nation.
It is not even to be inferred from the authorities here cited, that a coasting trade, in the
produce of the country, if carried not on freight, but as property belonging to the
neutral owner of the ship, is subject to any penalty. This indulgence to the coasting,
and rigor towards the colonial trade, is it to be explained by the fertility of the one,
and the little value of the other, as a source of captures and commercial profit, or in
what other way?

With respect to the orders of ’94 and ’98, and the colonial trade, it appears to have
been in general understood, that they were to be construed as successively enlarging
the trade of neutrals with the colonies of enemies, in the manner and to the extent
above explained.


The dilemma was indeed unavoidable; either the orders were to be considered as
relaxations, (and if relaxations at all, in that extent,) or as leaving the general principle
in force in cases not specified in the orders, and therefore as no relaxations at all.

This latter decision would have given a character of mockery to the profession and
parade of making, in their orders, so many sacrifices of belligerent rights to a spirit of
moderation and amity towards neutrals. The former side of the dilemma, therefore,
was necessarily taken. The orders, those of ’94 and ’98 at least, were relaxations.

As relaxations however in the extent required by an obvious and consistent
interpretation, the door, opened to neutral commerce with the belligerent colonies,
was found to be wider than was compatible either with the interests of British
commerce, and the avidity of British cruizers, or the probable intentions of the British
government.

What was to be the remedy? The first tried was that of shutting the door gradually, by
the dint of constructions, as may be seen by tracing the colonial cases adjudged by Sir
William Scott, and reported by Robinson, and the decisions of the Lords of Appeals
referred to by the reporter.

The task was assuredly not a little difficult, of which there is the strongest
demonstration in the crooked and contradictory reasonings and decrees, into which it
forced the very eminent talents of the judge who presides in the high court of
admiralty.

In addition to the evidence already presented, take the following comparison between
his rule of construction in the case of the Providentia,* and the rule of construction in
the case of the Immanuel.†

In the former case, August 16, 1799, he observes, “the first instructions were to bring
in all ships which had been trading with any colony of the enemy: but this country
afterwards receded from these directions; and the second orders were to bring in all
ships laden with produce of the West India islands coming directly from the ports of
the said islands to any port in Europe. I cannot but consider this as an abandonment of
the former law, [instruction,] and I cannot but think that a cruiser taking this
instruction, in conjunction with those given before must have inferred that it was no
longer the intention of government to bring in, and much less to confiscate,” [was
there room for this distinction?] “cargoes of West India produce, unless coming to
some port in Europe: this was followed by instructions now in force, which direct the
bringing in of all vessels laden with the produce of the French and Spanish
settlements, coming from the ports of such settlements to any port of Europe, other
than the ports of that country to which the vessel belongs. It is certainly not laid down
in the negative that they shall not bring in such vessels as are coming from such
settlements to their own ports; but looking at the former instruction, I think it was a
strong admonition to cruisers not to bring in such ships, and I believe it has been
generally so understood and acted upon by them; and in this court cargoes brought
from Surinam to ports in Europe to which the vessels belonged, have been uniformly
restored on proof of the neutrality of the property.”


The reasoning here is plain and just. The first instructions designated for capture the
colonial trade, without distinguishing between Europe and America: the second
designated the trade to Europe only: therefore, by fair inference, the trade to America
was exempted from capture.

Again, the second orders designated for capture the trade to Europe: the third orders
designated the trade to ports of Europe not being of Great Britain or of the country
owning the vessel: therefore by fair inference the trade to Great Britain and to
countries owning the vessels, was exempted from capture.

In the Immanuel, November 7, 1799, the case was that of a neutral ship taken on a
voyage last from France to a French colony. According to the reasoning of Sir
William Scott, just quoted, the inevitable inference ought to have been that the voyage
was legal.

The first instructions designated for capture the trade to and from the colonies. Both
the second and third designated for capture the trade only from the colonies; therefore,
according to that reasoning, the trade to the colonies was exempted from capture.

Hear nevertheless the reasoning employed by the judge himself in this case.

After combating the neutral right to trade with the colonies of an enemy, by
arguments applicable, in principle, as well to a trade between neutral ports and the
colonies, as to a trade between the mother country and its colonies; he proceeds to
state, in answer to all pleas for a neutral trade from the mother country to its colonies,
“that the true rule to this court is the text of the instructions; what is not found therein
permitted, is understood to be prohibited, upon this plain principle, that the colony
trade is generally prohibited, and that whatever is not specially relaxed, continues in a
state of interdiction.”

Now as what is not permitted, not specially relaxed, is by the instruction to continue
prohibited, the question to be decided is, what it is that is permitted, or specially
relaxed by the instructions. Is it what is positively and expressly permitted or relaxed?
Then there is no permission or relaxation at all; for every thing positive and express in
the instruction is for the capture, not for the permission or relaxation. Is it to be a
permission or relaxation implied and inferred from a positive and specified
prohibition in one order, and an omission of that or of a part of that prohibition, in a
succeeding order? Then the neutral trade from a belligerent country to its colonies,
which was prohibited in the order of 1793, and omitted in the orders of 1794 and
1798, was as much permitted, as specially relaxed, as the trade from a neutral country
to the colonies of an enemy, is permitted or relaxed by the omission in the orders of
1794 and ’98, to prohibit the trade to the colonies, which as well as the trade from the
colonies, was positively and specially prohibited by the previous order of 1793; or to
recur to the reasoning of Sir William Scott, in the former case of the Providentia, as
much permitted or relaxed as the trade from the colonies going not to Europe, was
inferred to be so from the order of 1794, taken in conjunction with the order of 1793;
the order of ’93 having prohibited the trade from the colonies generally, and the order


of ’94 having omitted to prohibit more of the trade from the colonies than what was
bound to some port in Europe.

The judge concludes with declaring, “I see no favorable distinction between an
outward and return voyage. I consider the intent of the instruction to apply equally to
both communications, though the return voyage is the only one specially mentioned.”

What favorable distinction, then, could the judge see between the outward and the
return voyage, in a trade between a neutral country, and the colonies of an enemy,
more than between the two voyages to Spain, a mother country, and the colonies? Is
not the return voyage the only one specially mentioned, whether the instruction be
applied to the former trade or to the latter trade? This is self evident. Either then he
must admit the distinction in both, and say that the return voyage only being specially
mentioned, the outward voyage is in both trades permitted; or he must reject the
distinction in both, and say, that the outward voyage, tho’ the return voyage only be
specially mentioned, is prohibited in both. A different course however was pursued.
The instruction was applied to the outward voyage in the neutral trade from the
mother country to the colony, without being considered as applicable to the outward
voyage in the trade from the neutral country to a colony; which last has not as yet
been subjected to condemnation. Whether that is to be its future destiny, as has
happened to some other branches of commerce, where it was equally precluded by
legal decisions and even official assurances, is among the arcana of the admiralty
cabinet of Great Britain.

The judgment in this case, it is to be observed, did not go beyond the condemnation of
the goods. The vessel was restored, but with a forfeiture of freight and expences.

By degrees, however, with the aid of alleged fraud, of false destination, and of
contraband in the outward voyages, the ship as well as the cargo were brought within
the rules of condemnation in the high court of admiralty. The decision of the lords of
appeal has finally established, in the case of a voyage from a Spanish colony to a
neutral, but forbidden port in Europe, that any illegal trade of neutrals with the
colonies of an enemy forfeits both ship and cargo.*

Other examples might be drawn from the proceedings in the British courts of
admiralty, to illustrate the constructive return towards the general principle which had
been mitigated by successive instructions, and the anomalous and entangled decisions,
which have been employed for the purpose. These illustrations cannot be here
pursued, without too great an addition to the prolixity which has already been
incurred. It will only therefore be remarked generally; first, that the course of
proceedings, as they relate to the coasting, and different branches of the colonial
trade; to the grounds on which these have been interdicted to neutrals; and to the
penalties attached to breaches of the interdictions, compose a labyrinth for which no
concatenation of principles, no thread of reasoning whatever, affords a clue: secondly,
that constructive decisions, as appears in the last volume of Robinson’s reports, have
not only restored, in a great measure, the operation of the general principle; but have
introduced collateral principles, greatly extending the mischiefs of its operation.


Whilst all the considerations therefore which originally led to the examination of this
principle, are acquiring additional force, it is fortunate that so irresistible a testimony
against its legitimacy, should have been furnished by the conduct of Great Britain
herself.

Review of the reasons urged in defence of the British principle.

Although some of the reasons by which this belligerent claim of Great Britain is
defended, have incidentally fallen under consideration in the course which the subject
has taken, yet a more particular notice of those most relied on, may be necessary to
complete the present examination.

The principal champions for the claim, are the judge of the high court of admiralty
himself, Sir William Scott; Mr. Ward, now under Secretary of State in Great Britain,
who is sufficiently known by his treatises on the law of nations, one of which
embraces this precise subject; and Mr. Browne, a professor of civil law in the
University of Dublin, and author of a work on civil and admiralty law.

Sir William Scott has, in every view, the first title to be heard.

In the judgment delivered by him in the case of the Immanuel, his eloquence has
painted the belligerent claim in very glowing colours. The passage shall be given in
his own words:

“It is an indubitable right of the belligerent to possess himself of such places, as of
any other possession of his enemy. This is his common right, but he has the certain
means of carrying such a right into effect, if he has a decided superiority at sea: such
colonies are dependent for their existence, as colonies, on foreign supplies; if they
cannot be supplied and defended they must fall to the belligerent of course—and if the
belligerent chooses to apply his means to such an object, what right has a third party,
perfectly neutral, to step in and prevent the execution? No existing interest of his is
affected by it; he can have no right to apply to his own use the beneficial
consequences of the mere act of the belligerent, and say, ‘True it is, you have, by
force of arms, forced such places out of the exclusive possession of the enemy, but I
will share the benefit of the conquest, and by sharing its benefits prevent its progress.
You have in effect, and by lawful means, turned the enemy out of the possession
which he had exclusively maintained against the whole world, and with whom we had
never presumed to interfere, but we will interpose to prevent his absolute surrender,
by the means of that very opening, which the prevalence of your arms alone has
effected; supplies shall be sent and their products shall be exported; you have lawfully
destroyed his monopoly, but you shall not be permitted to possess it yourself; we
insist to share the fruits of your victories, and your blood and treasure have been
expended, not for your own interests, but for the common benefit of others.’ Upon
these grounds it cannot be contended to be a right of neutrals, to intrude into a
commerce which had been uniformly shut against them, and which is now forced
open merely by the pressure of war; for when the enemy, under an entire inability to
supply his colonies and to export their products, affects to open them to neutrals, it is
not his will but his necessity that changes his system; that change is the direct and


unavoidable consequence of the compulsion of war, it is a measure not of French
councils, but of British force.”

The first remark to be made is, that were the intrinsic reasonableness of the claim
admitted, it would not follow that the claim is justified by the law of nations as
actually established. Reason is indeed the main source from which the law of nations
is deduced; and in questions of a doubtful nature, is the only rule by which the
decision ought to be made. But the law of nations, as an established code, as an actual
rule of conduct among nations, includes, as already explained, a variety of usages and
regulations, founded in consent, either tacit or express, and superadding to the
precepts of reason, rules of conduct of a kind altogether positive and mutable. If
reason and conveniency alone, without regard to usage and authority, were to decide
all questions of public law, not a few of the received doctrines would at once be
superseded; and among the first, some to which Great Britain is most pertinaciously
attached. What would become of her favorite claim, to seize and condemn all enemy’s
property, laden in neutral vessels, if the claim were brought to the simple test of
reason? a claim which gives so much more vexation to the nations at peace, than it
contributes to any just advantage of those at war. On this question, it is well known,
that the appeal has been constantly made by Great Britain from the reasoning of her
adversaries, to the authority of celebrated jurists, and other testimonies of the
established rules and practice of nations. She must not expect to vary her test of right,
according to her individual interest: to appeal to authority when reason is against her,
and to reason, when authority is against her.

In testing the British claim, then, by the law of nations, recurrence must be had to
other sources than the abstract dictates of reason; to those very sources from which it
has been shewn that her claim is an unauthorized innovation on the law of nations.

But let us examine this appeal of the eloquent Judge to the reasonableness of his
cause, and see what is gained by it.

“It is an indubitable right of the belligerent to possess himself of such places, viz:
colonies, [but the argument extends to all places shut against neutral commerce in
time of peace,] as of any other possession of his enemy.” Without question he has the
right to possess himself of any place belonging to his enemy.

“But he has the certain means of carrying such a right into effect if he has a decided
superiority at sea.” This is not so universally true as is assumed. A land force will be
also necessary; unless both the superiority at sea and the situation of the colony be
such as to admit a complete interruption of supplies; and then, a blockade must be the
only legitimate expedient.

“Such colonies are dependent for their existence as colonies, on foreign supplies: if
they cannot be supplied and defended they must fall to the belligerent of course.” It is
certainly true that they must fall, if they can be neither fed nor defended. But it is not
so true that colonies, as such, are dependent on foreign supplies. Some insular
colonies are so dependent; others are not. Few, if any, of the continental colonies or
settlements are dependent on foreign supplies.


“And if the belligerent chooses to apply his means to such an object, what right has a
third party perfectly neutral to step in, and prevent the execution?” No right at all to
step in; provided the belligerent does, in fact, apply his means to that object, and, in
the mode, conformable to the law of nations; that is, by intercepting contraband of
war, and availing himself of his decided superiority at sea, to blockade the places,
which if deprived of foreign supplies, must fall into his hands of course.

Take the argument under another aspect. Colonies must fall without foreign supplies;
therefore, it is said, a belligerent, without invading or investing them, may prevent
neutrals from supplying them.

The argument has one tendency which ought not to have escaped the penetration of its
author. If the dependence of a place for its existence and defence on foreign supplies,
be the ground of the belligerent right to intercept all neutral trade whatever with it, it
will not be very easy to find a reasonable ground for the belligerent right to obstruct
neutral supplies to a place blockaded, where the place, as frequently occurs, does not
depend on foreign supplies for its existence and defence.

Or the argument may take another turn, which ought not to escape the attention of
neutrals. If the applicability, without an actual application of the means, to the
legitimate object of possessing himself of the colonies of enemies, can justify the
capture of netural trade with such places, the mere existence of a force applicable to
the purpose of a blockade any where, will, without an actual blockade, equally
authorize the capture of a neutral trade with ports susceptible of blockade; and thus
the neutral trade becomes interdicted with every part of the dominions of her enemy;
on the same principle as interdicts it with the colonial part of their dominions; a
blockade being as legitimate an object of war as conquest; and a decided superiority at
sea being at least as applicable to the former, as to the latter object.

But an essential vice of the argument lies in the fallacy of the inference. It no more
follows from the dependence of colonies on foreign supplies, that neutrals have no
right to trade with them, with the exceptions of contraband and of blockaded ports,
than it follows from the dependence of other countries or parts of countries on foreign
supplies, that neutrals have no such right. Is not Holland, is not Portugal, is not even
Spain, at all times, dependent on foreign supplies for their subsistence; not less
perhaps than some of the insular colonies in the West, and much more than some in
the East Indies? Yet since the usurped power of obstructing all neutral trade with an
enemy was abandoned by belligerent nations has it ever been pretended that that
dependence gave a right to the enemies of those countries to prevent neutral supplies
to them?

The argument fails when brought to another test, If the dependence on foreign
necessaries constitutes the belligerent claim against the neutral trade to colonies, the
principle of the claim limits it to such colonies as labour under this dependence. The
continental colonies or settlements, which have within themselves resources,
necessary for their existence, and which therefore no decided superiority at sea can
reduce into the possession of a belligerent, are clearly not within the utmost range of
the principle. Yet no distinction is made in the application of it, either in argument or


practice, between the most sterile and indefensible island, and the vast and fertile
provinces on the continent of South America.

Thus far, then, the judge has found no foothold for the belligerent pretension which he
endeavors to support.

But he must be heard further: “No existing interest of his [the neutral] is affected by
it,” [an exclusion, &c.]

The interests of neutrals may be materially affected by the loss of the customary
supplies from belligerent colonies, as must happen, if they can neither trade directly
with the colonies, nor receive supplies from them thro’ the mother country. This is the
consideration expressly assigned, in the appendix to 4 Rob., for the orders of 1798:
“Neutral vessels were by this relaxation allowed to carry on a direct commerce
between the colony of an enemy and their own country; a concession rendered more
reasonable by the events of war, which by annihilating the trade of France, Spain, and
Holland, had entirely deprived the States of Europe, of the opportunity of supplying
themselves with the articles of colonial produce, in those markets.” This is a view of
the subject very different from that given by Sir William Scott here, and in another
paragraph; where he represents “Guadaloupe and Jamaica, as no more to Germany,
than if they were settlements in the mountains of the moon, to commercial purposes,
as not in the same planet.”

The judge proceeds, “He [the neutral] can have no right to apply to his own use, the
beneficial consequences of the mere act of the belligerent.”

Why not? In many respects, as will hereafter be seen, the neutral suffers by war; is it
unreasonable that in some respects, he should profit by its effects?

Waiving this consideration, it does not follow that one belligerent has a right to
deprive a neutral of a colonial market opened to him under the pressure of war, by
another belligerent, any more than of any new market or new channel of trade, in
relation to the mother country, opened under a like pressure. As yet, however, the
latter pretension has not appeared.* It is even disavowed in a succeeding passage of
this very judgment. Is it not the pressure of war, which at this time, obliges the
enemies of Great Britain, to abandon in great measure, to neutral vessels, the trade
between themselves and other countries? Is it not the pressure of war, during which
more food is consumed, with fewer hands to raise it, that often compels nations at
war, to open their ports to the supplies and ships of neutrals, contrary to their ordinary
regulations in time of peace? In a word, the whole commercial policy of belligerent
towards neutral nations, undergoes changes, which the latter is in the constant practice
of “applying to their own use.” And it is manifest that Great Britain is as ready, as any
of her enemies, to lay open her navigation and her colonial markets, though so
rigorously shut in time of peace, whenever the pressure of war, makes it her interest,
that neutrals should apply the benefit of these changes to their own use.


It is perfectly clear, then, that the mere circumstance of an increase of profit to
neutrals, from a participation in branches of trade opened under the pressure of war,
does not render that participation unlawful.

The sequel of the argument assumes a very singular shape. The neutral has no right to
say to the belligerent,—“True it is you have by force of arms forced such places out
of the exclusive possession of the enemy, but I will share the benefit of the conquest;
and by sharing its benefits, prevent its progress. You have, in effect, and by lawful
means, turned the enemy out of the possession which he had exclusively maintained
against the whole world, and with whom we had never presumed to interfere; but we
will interpose to prevent his absolute surrender, by the means of that very opening
which the prevalence of your arms alone has effected.”

Here let it be observed, the case first stated is, that the place has been forced by one
belligerent out of the possession of another belligerent, and that the neutral is
undertaking to share the benefit of the conquest. Were that the real intention, as it is
the inevitable import of the statement, there could be no advocate for a neutral
pretension to interfere. But with an inaccuracy (a harder term will not be applied)
little to have been looked for where it is found, this conquest, this turning of the
enemy out of exclusive possession, does not in the least mean, as is quickly disclosed,
a transfer of the place or colony to a new sovereign. The colony remains precisely as
it did; not even attacked or threatened by a military operation. The conquest really
meant turns out to be nothing more than the creation of a certain degree of difficulty
and danger in the trade between the colony and the mother country. With this change
in the statement of the fact, the inference with respect to the intrusion of a neutral
commerce must, unfortunately for the argument, undergo a correspondent change. As
the conquest of the colony would have justified the conqueror stepping into the
exclusive possession, out of which his arms had forced his enemy, in prohibiting a
neutral interference with its trade, it is equally certain, that he is not justified in any
such prohibition by the mere obstruction thrown in the way of the ordinary colonial
trade; any more than he would be justified by obstructions thrown equally in the way
of other branches of his enemy’s trade, in prohibiting the entrance of neutrals into
them.

That the meaning of the judge is shifted from an expulsion of the enemy from his
colony, to an obstruction of his trade with his colony, is put beyond all question by the
conclusion of this hypothetical address of the neutral to the belligerent,—“Supplies
shall be sent, and their products shall be exported; you have lawfully destroyed his
monopoly, but you shall not be permitted to possess it yourself.”

Thus the right of a belligerent to possess himself of the colonies of his enemies
depending on foreign supplies, which, in the beginning of the argument, was the
ground of the unlawfulness of such neutral supplies, as might prevent the colonies
from falling into the hands of the belligerent, undergoes a complete transformation in
its progress, and ends in a right of the belligerent to supply the colonies himself, in
exclusion of neutrals. The neutral is interdicted from sending supplies to an enemy’s
colony, and exporting its produce; not because it would interfere with the reduction of


an enemy’s possession; but because it would interfere with a commercial monopoly.
This at least would be a new principle in the law of nations.

But it is worth while to enquire how the right of a belligerent to subdue the colonies
of his enemy, and for that purpose to obstruct neutral supplies to them, can be
reconciled with the actual regulations of the British Government on this subject.
Whilst this claim is exercised, in general, so much to the disadvantage and
dissatisfaction of neutrals, it is relaxed in some respects which are fatal to the very
purpose of the belligerent to subdue the colonies of his enemy; which purpose alone
could give a colour to any such obstruction of neutral commerce. The orders both of
1794 and of 1798 limit their restrictions on neutrals to the trade from colonies; leaving
by implication, unrestricted, the trade to the colonies; or they manifest, at least, under
every construction, a solicitude rather against the trade from, than against the trade to
the colonies. Now if the object and the pretext, in controuling the trade with the
colonies, be the conquest of the colonies, is it not extraordinary that whilst checks are
opposed to the exports, which can, at the most, have but a remote influence in
preserving them from the necessity of surrender, the channel should be left open for
the importation of those foreign supplies, for the want of which, they might fall to the
belligerent of course? How is this to be explained? Not, certainly, by a belligerent
policy, which is completely defeated by the relaxation. There is but one explanation
that is satisfactory, and it must not be deemed uncandid to resort to it. As the orders
have endeavored to give to the trade from the colonies such a course as was most
favorable to imports into Great Britain, the course allowed to the conveyance of
supplies to the colonies is equally favorable to the export of manufactures from Great
Britain. British manufactures, it must have been supposed, could find their way to
hostile colonies, through no channel so conveniently and certainly, as through that of
neutrals which conveys the means of subsistence. Whilst the regulation, therefore,
defeats the measure of conquest, it extends the market for manufactures. Every fold of
this belligerent claim wraps up some commercial project.

In prosecuting his argument, the judge occupies another ground for this belligerent
pretension: “Different degrees of relaxation,” he observes, “have been expressed in
different instructions issued at various times during the war. It is admitted that no
such relaxation has gone the length of authorizing a direct commerce of neutrals,
between the mother country and its colonies; because such a commerce could not be
admitted without a total surrender of the principle: for allow such a commerce to
neutrals, and the mother country of the enemy recovers, with some increase of
expence, the direct market of the colonies, and the direct influx of their productions; it
enjoys as before, the duties of import and export, the same facilities of sale and
supply, and the mass of public inconvenience is very slightly diminished.”

It was lately the object of dispossessing the enemy of his colonies altogether, that
authorized the obstruction of neutral supplies. It was next the object of securing to the
belligerent himself, the monopoly of the commerce with those colonies, that gave him
such an authority. Now the authority is derived from the policy of withholding from
the mother country of the colony, the public conveniencies arising from the revenue
and from the commercial profits supplied by her direct intercourse with her colonies.


It cannot be necessary to dwell on the hollowness of this foundation, for the claim to
make war on the participation of neutrals in a colonial trade. It will be merely
observed, or rather repeated, that if neutrals have no right to trade with an enemy,
where the enemy in consequence of the pressure of the war, would otherwise lose the
revenues and other public advantages flowing from the trade, the inference fairly is,
that Great Britain, by driving the ships of her enemies, as she does at this moment,
altogether from the sea, may renew with effect the old and exploded tyranny of
interdicitng all neutral commerce whatever with her enemies.

This last argument only against the neutral trade to colonies, was applicable to the
coasting trade. There, neither conquest, nor the substitution of the belligerent’s own
commerce, could be the object. It will accordingly be seen in the case of the
Immanuel,* that the belligerent claim is founded, as it is here, on its general effect in
cramping the revenues of the enemy, and in inflicting a pressure which may compel a
due sense and observance of justice.

It only remains to advert to a reply, from the judge to the counsel at the bar, with
which he closes the argumentative part of his judgment.

The inconsistency of Great Britain, in making, in time of war, the same relaxations in
her navigation and colonial monopolies, which she denies the right of her enemies to
make, is so obvious that it could not possibly escape the notice of the counsel for
neutral claimants. The more striking the inconsistency, however, the greater the
delicacy which was to be observed in pressing it on the court. It appears accordingly
to have been brought into view, in one instance only, in Robinson’s Admiralty
Reports, which was in this case of the Immanuel; and here it is managed with much
tenderness, and seasoned, finally, with some material concessions to the known
opinions of the Bench and the government. In order to do justice to Mr. Arnold and
Mr. Sewell, charged on that occasion with the defence of the neutral claimants, and
for the sake of some very judicious reflections of a more general nature, with which
they introduce their particular argument, no abridgment will be made of the following
passage:

“It is true that the general colonial law of Europe has created a monopoly, from which
other countries are generally precluded; at the same time laws respecting colonies,
and laws respecting trade in general, have always undergone some change and
relaxation after the breaking out of hostilities; it is necessary that it should be so, with
regard to the rights of neutral nations; because as war cannot be carried on between
the principal powers of Europe, in such a manner as to confine the effects of it to
themselves alone, it follows that there must be some changes and variation in the
trade of Europe, and it cannot be said that neutrals many not take the benefit of any
advantages that may offer from these changes—because if so, it would lead to a total
destruction of neutral trade; if they were to suffer the obstructions in their old trade,
which war always brings with it, and were not permitted to engage in new channels, it
would amount to a total extinction of neutral commerce: such a position, therefore,
cannot be maintained, that they may not avail themselves of what is beneficial in
these changes, in lieu of what they must necessarily suffer, in other parts of their
trade, in time of war. It is not meant that they should be entirely set at liberty from all


the restrictions of peace—that would be going too far. But that, as there has been a
regular course of relaxations, as well in our navigation laws, as in the colonial trade,
in admitting importations and exportations not allowed in time of peace; it seems not
to be too much to say, that if they have been regularly relaxed in former wars, neutral
merchants may think themselves at liberty to engage in it, in any ensuing war, with
impunity; and it does justify a presumption, that as a belligerent country allows a
change in its own system as necessary, and invites neutrals to trade in its colonies
under relaxations, so it would allow them to trade in the same manner, with the
colonies of the enemy.”

In reply:—

“It is an argument,” says the judge, “rather of a more legal nature than any derived
from those general topics of commercial policy, that variations are made in the
commercial systems of every country in wars and on account of wars, by means of
which neutrals are admitted and invited into different kinds of trade, from which they
stand usually excluded; and if so, no one belligerent country has a right to interfere
with neutrals for acting under variations of a like kind made for similar reasons in the
commercial policy of its enemy. And certainly if this proposition could be maintained
without any limitation, that wherever any variation whatever is made during a war,
and on account of the state of war, the party who makes it, binds himself in all the
variations to which the necessities of the enemy can compel him, the whole colony
trade of the enemy is legalized; and the instructions which are directed against any
part are equally unjust and impertinent; for it is not denied that some such variations
may be found in the commercial policy of this country itself; although some that have
been cited are not exactly of that nature. The opening of free ports is not necessarily a
measure arising from the demands of war; it is frequently a peace measure in the
colonial system of every country: there are others, which more directly arise out of the
necessities of war;—the admission of foreigners into the merchant service as well as
into the military service of this country;—the permission given to vessels, to import
commodities not the growth, produce, and manufacture of the country to which they
belong, and other relaxations of the act of navigation, and other regulations founded
thereon: these, it is true, take place in war, and arise out of a state ofwar; but then
they do not arise out of the predominance of the enemies force, or out of any necessity
resulting therefrom; and this I take to be the true foundation of the principle. It is not
every convenience, or even every necessity arising out of a state of war; but that
necessity which arises out of the impossibility of otherwise providing against the
urgency of distress inflicted by the hand of a superior enemy, that can be admitted to
produce such an effect. Thns, in time of war, every country admits foreigners into its
general service—every country obtains, by the means of neutral vessels, those
products of the enemy’s country which it cannot possibly receive, either by means of
his navigation or its own. These are ordinary measures, to which every country has
resort in every war, whether prosperous or adverse: they arise, it is true, out of a state
of war, but are totally independent of its events, and have therefore no common origin
with those compelled relaxations of the colonial monopoly; these are acts of distress,
signals of defeat and depression; they are no better than partial surrenders to the force
of the enemy, for the mere purpose of preventing a total dispossession. I omit other


observations which have been urged and have their force: it is sufficient that the
variations alluded to stand upon grounds of a most distinguishable nature.”

On comparing the argument of the counsel with the discourse of the judge, there is but
too much room to remark, that there are in the former a coolness and clearness not
unworthy of the Bench; and in the latter a florid and fervid stile, which might have
been less unsuitable to the zeal of the bar. But it is more important to examine and
weigh the effect which their respective reasonings, so far as those of the judge can be
extricated from the general and somewhat obscure expressions employed by him,
ought to have on the point in question.

The reasoning at the bar is simply this—that as Great Britain is herself in the practice
of opening to neutrals, in time of war, channels of navigation and colonial markets,
which she shuts to them in time of peace; she ought to allow, or might reasonably be
presumed to allow, as equally lawful in time of war, a like relaxation of the colonial
system of her enemies.

The judge does not deny the fact that Great Britain is in the practice of relaxing in
time of war her system of colonial trade. He does not deny the inference that a like
relaxation would be equally lawful on the part of her enemies. It might have been
expected, therefore, that in his reply he would have allowed to the enemies of Great
Britain the same right to capture neutrals trading with her colonies, as is exercised by
Great Britain against neutrals trading with the colonies of her enemies; and have
contented himself with the advantage enjoyed by Great Britain in her superior means
of intercepting the neutral trade with her enemies, and of preventing her enemies from
intercepting the neutral trade with herself. This, it would seem, was a more consistent,
and also a more politic ground to have taken. The judge was of a different opinion.
Unwilling to make even that degree of concession, he attempts to retain the privilege
claimed by Great Britain, and at the same time withhold it from her enemies; by
certain distinctions between the two cases. With what success the distinctions are
made is now to be seen.

One of the distinctions is between a colonial trade which is frequently opened in
peace, as in the case of free ports, and a colonial trade opened in war only.

The example of free ports was not very happily chosen; for it has been seen that the
trade from such ports in the French West Indies to the United States, was not excepted
in the British orders on the subject of neutral trade with the colonies of France; nor is
it known that any such exception has been made in the British courts of admiralty.

The distinction, however, fails in its essential point. It is not an uncommon thing for
relaxations to take place in time of peace as well as in time of war, in the colonial
monopolies of all the European nations. The Spaniards, the French, and the Dutch,*
never fail to open their colonies to foreign supplies, whenever a scarcity, or other
cause, renders it inconvenient to supply them from European sources. Even on this
ground then, as admitted by the judge himself, a neutral trade with enemy’s colonies
would be lawful in time of war.


Another distinction is intimated between the ordinary measures of relaxation, to
which every country has resort in every war, whether prosperous or adverse, and
unusual measures of relaxation produced by a peculiar state of the war.

Here again the distinction directly militates against the object for which it is made, it
being well known to be an ordinary measure, with the enemies of Great Britain, in all
modern wars at least, to open their colonial ports to neutral supplies. Prior to the
American revolution, Great Britain had, in these States, resources which rendered it
unnecessary for her colonies to invite supplies, if indeed they could have been
obtained, from any foreign sources. In her wars since that event, she has followed the
example of her enemies in relaxing her colonial system, as far as was necessary to
obtain supplies, from the sources and through the channels which furnish her enemies.
At this moment, her islands are as open as the colonies of her enemies to the supplies
and the vessels of the United States, with this difference, indeed, that her ports are
opened by regulations more temporizing and more special, than those of some, if not
all, of her enemies; and therefore with pretensions to legality, according to her own
standard, inferior to those of her enemies.

The remaining distinction is the sole fortress on which the defence of the principle
maintained by the judge, must depend. This distinction is so novel, and in its
appearance so refined, that in explaining it some difficulty was naturally felt, in the
selection of apposite expressions. A critic, tinctured with want of candor, might be
tempted to exclaim, that a distinction between a necessity arising out of a state of war,
and a necessity arising out of an impossibility, which impossibility arises out of a
state of war, was a subject less proper for discussion, than for a less serious treatment.

The judge, however, cannot be justly charged with a want of meaning, whatever may
have been his difficulty or his caution in expressing it. It may be collected, with
sufficient certainty, that he meant to establish the right of Britain, and the want of
right in her enemies to interrupt neutral commerce, on the predominance of force, on
the decided superiority at sea, which she enjoys, and on the inferiority of force, under
which her enemies labour. When she opens her colonial ports to neutrals, although it
arises out of a state of war, it does not arise, like theirs, out of the predominance of the
enemy’s force. This predominance he frankly declares to be the true foundation of the
principle.

And thus we are arrived at the true foundation of the principle which has so often
varied its attitudes of defence, and when driven from one stand, has been so ready to
occupy another. Finding no asylum elsewhere, it at length boldly asserts, as its true
foundation, a mere superiority of force. It is right in Great Britain to capture and
condemn a neutral trade with her enemies, disallowed by her enemies in time of
peace, for the sole reason that her force is predominant at sea. And it is wrong in her
enemies to capture and condemn a neutral trade with British colonies, because their
maritime force is inferior to hers. The question no longer is, whether the trade be right
or wrong in itself, but on which side the superiority of force lies? The law of nations,
the rights of neutrals, the freedom of the seas, the commerce of the world, are to
depend, not on any fixt principle of justice, but on the comparative state of naval
armaments, which itself may change at every moment, may depend on the event of a


battle, on the skill of an admiral, on the tack of the wind; on one of those thousand
casualties which verify the admonition, that the battle is not always given to the
strong, any more than the race to the swift.

A government, which avows such a principle of conduct among nations, must feel
great confidence in the permanence, as well as the predominance of its own power.

It would nevertheless not be unwise in any nation, to reflect on the vicissitudes of
human affairs, and to ask herself the honest question, how she would relish the
application of the principle, if in the course of events, a maritime superiority should
happen to change sides? Should Great Britain ever find the state of things thus
reversed, she might wish, in vain perhaps, to let her claim pass silently into abeyance,
as she alleges was done in the war of 1778.

Nor would it be less unworthy of her wisdom to reflect, that if a predominance of
force on one element confers right, a similar right might result from a predominance
of force on another element.

The supposition may be made to press more immediately on her reflections. Great
Britain as a maritime power is as dependent on external commerce, as the insular
dominions of her enemies are, as colonies, dependent on external supplies. In this
general view, the principle which she employs against the colonies of her enemies,
may be turned by her enemies against herself. But a more particular view demands
her attention. She has already beheld her principal enemy on a coast little distant from
her own, by a decided preponderance of force on land, and a threatened co-operation
of naval armaments giving to the war an unexampled pressure on her faculties and
resources. The wheel of fortune may reproduce the crisis. Her seamen may be taken
from her merchant ships, to man her fleets. Her fleets may be called home from the
protection of commerce, to the defence of the State. In this posture of things, her
harvest may fail, her existence may depend on foreign food; its importation on neutral
commerce; and the successful use of this resource, on the right of neutral ships to a
navigation not open to them in times of peace. With such monitory possibilities in
view, ought an enlightened nation by her own example, and her own language, to
authorize her enemies to say to her friends—you have no right to step into a trade
with our enemy, from which his monopoly of the navigation excluded you in times of
peace; you have no right to import for him supplies which are absolutely necessary for
his support, and which the distress I am inflicting, renders it impossible for him
otherwise to obtain. Neither have you any right by a trade, also forbidden in time of
peace, to furnish to his colonies the supplies which his command of the sea no longer
ensures to them, and without which they must fall of course into our possession.

What reply could be made to such an expostulation, by a neutral, who had not refused
to recognise a like claim on the part of Great Britain; and, by the refusal, consulted
better the interest of Great Britain, than she had consulted it herself in advancing the
claim?

Taking leave of the very distinguished judge, with these observations, some notice is
next due to Mr. Ward and Mr. Browne.


A remark that soon occurs on opening the volumes of these writers is, that both of
them confound the principle here in question, with the question whether free ships
make free goods, and under this confusion, bring the former within the arguments and
authorities belonging to the latter only. The confusion results not only from the more
general expressions in which they describe the controversy between neutral and
belligerent nations, on the subject of commerce; but is promoted by their frequent use
of the terms “carrying trade,” without distinguishing between the carriage of enemies
property in neutral vessels, and the neutral carriage of neutral property in channels
navigated in time of peace by domestic carriers only. These questions are evidently
and essentially distinct; and the distinction answers, of itself, much of the reasoning
employed by those writers; and most, of the authorities cited by them.

With respect to the consolato del mare, so much appealed to by Mr. Ward, it has been
already observed that however direct its authority may be against the principle that
enemy’s property in neutral vessels is subject to confiscation, there is not a sentence
in that compilation which directly or indirectly recognizes or favors a belligerent
claim, to confiscate neutral property, on the principle that it is found in channels of
trade not open at all to other than subjects or citizens of the belligerent, in time of
peace. The negative testimony of the consolato, therefore, is completely in favor of
the contrary principle.

In recurring to Grotius, Mr. Ward is led, by his own comment on the passage which
describes the rights of belligerents against the trade of neutrals, to conclude that the
real question before Grotius, was that which Grotius said had been so much and so
sharply agitated, namely, whether a belligerent had a right to interdict all neutral
commerce with his antagonist; and Mr. Ward accordingly takes the defensive ground
of maintaining that the neutral “claim to a carrying trade had never entered the mind
of Grotius.”

If by the “carrying trade” Mr. Ward means the carriage of enemy’s property, it must
have been within the view of Grotius; because he has furnished Mr. Ward himself
with an authority against the lawfulness of such a trade. If by the “carrying trade” he
meant a trade carried on in war, where it was not allowed in peace, it is strictly true,
that it appears never to have entered the mind of Grotius. It did not enter his mind,
because no such particular claim had ever been asserted or exercised against neutrals.
The general claim to intercept all neutral commerce with an enemy, did enter into his
mind and into his discussion, as well as the other particular claims of belligerents in
the case of contraband and of blockades; because as well that general claim, as those
particular claims, had, at different periods, been asserted and exercised against
neutrals. To suppose that the carrying trade could be unnoticed by Grotius, for any
other reason than that no belligerent right to intercept that particular branch of trade,
had been asserted, would be the more preposterous, for the reason suggested by Mr.
Ward, “that Grotius lived in a time when his countrymen were raising to its height the
source of their commerce, by rendering their State the emporium of trade, and
becoming the carriers of the rest of the world;” carriers as well of their own property
as of the property of others, and in every channel which might be opened to them with
profit to the carriers.


Notwithstanding this relinquishment of the authority of Grotius, in relation to the
carrying trade, Mr. Ward has shewn a strong inclination to extract from certain terms
employed by Grotius, on the subject before him, some general countenance to the
British principle.

Grotius, it must be admitted, is less definite in explaining himself in this particular
instance, than he is in others; and much less so, than other jurists who have succeeded
him. It is impossible at the same time to put on his words, any construction that will
avail Mr. Ward.

Although the passage has been heretofore analyzed, it will not be improper to re-
examine it with a particular reference to the argument of this writer.

Grotius having made his distribution of the articles of neutral commerce into three
classes—1st, of such as are wholly of pacific use—2d, such as are wholly military,
and 3d, such as are, usus ancipitis—of a doubtful or double use, enlarges on this 3d
class in the words following—“In tertio illo genere, usûs ancipitis, distinguendus erit
belli status. Nam si tueri me non possum nisi quæ mittuntur intercipiam, necessitas ut
alibi exposuimus jus dabit sub onere restitutionis, nisi causa alia accedat. Quod si juris
mei executionem rerum subvectio impedierit, id que sciri potuerit qui advexit, ut si
oppidum obessum tenebam, si portus clausos, et jam deditio aut pax expectabatur,
tenebitur ille mihi de damno culpa dato, ut qui debitorem carceri eximit,”* &c., &c.
He proceeds next to graduate the injuries done to the belligerent and the penalties due
to the neutral, according to certain distinctions since exploded, particularly the
distinction between a just and unjust war, on which he founds a rule; “Quod si
præterea evidentissima sit hostis mei in me injustitia, et ille eum in bello iniquissimo
confirmet, jam non tantum civiliter tenebitur de damno sed et criminaliter, &c.”

From this text, Mr. Ward makes the following deduction: “The tenor of these words
‘status belli’ which is a general description; of ‘juris executione’ which is the very
right to take arms; of ‘pax expectabatur’ which is a final termination of hostilities, not
surrender of the besieged place; and lastly of ‘bello confirmet’ which is demonstrably
applicable to the whole field of war: these (he says) prove him to be occupied with the
general plan of operations, and the general exigencies of a state of hostility.”

The great importance attached to this passage in Grotius, and the extensive
consequences drawn from it by this learned champion of the British principle, will be
apologies for a more critical attention to the passage, than it could be thought, of
itself, to require.

Whether Grotius did or did not limit his meaning to the nature of contraband articles,
and the case of blockades; it is demonstrable that his words are inapplicable to the
distinction between a trade permitted, and a trade not permitted in peace.

1. According to Grotius, the articles in question are of the third class only, the class of
a doubtful or double use: the principle of Great Britain makes no such distinction.
Articles of every class and kind found in the new channel of trade, are rendered
unlawful by the channel itself, however inapplicable they may be to the uses of war.


2. According to Grotius, it is one state of war compared to another state of war, that is
to be distinguished—“distinquendus erit belli status:” According to Great Britain, the
essence of the distinction is, between the state of war, and the state of peace; or rather
between the state of the municipal laws of commerce in time of war, and the state of
those laws in time of peace.

3. According to Grotius, the right to intercept the neutral commerce accrues from its
particular necessity, as a measure of defence: according to Great Britain, the necessity
is not the criterion. If there be no such necessity, the trade is condemned, in case the
channel were unlawful before the war. Be the necessity what it may, the trade is free,
if the channel was lawful before the war.

4. According to Grotius it must be such a necessity as he had elsewhere pointed
out—“ut alibi exposuimus.” The British advocates have not undertaken to show any
other passage of Grotius, giving the explanation which their principle requires. No
such passage exists.

5. According to Grotius, the articles intercepted, if no other cause prevent, are to be
restored. According to the British decisions, no such restitution is due. Both vessel
and cargo are confiscated.

6. Finally—The war to which Grotius refers, when he uses the expression “bello
confirmet” is a war of the most evident injustice—“evidentissima injustitia;
belloiniquissimoconfirmet,” not bello confirmet, as cited by Mr. Ward. The distinction
between just and unjust wars, does not enter into the principle, on which Great Britain
founds her belligerent claim. It is, in fact, disclaimed by Bynkershoeck,* who
succeeded Grotius; and tho’ countenanced by Vattel, is generally understood to be
excluded from questions affecting belligerent and neutral rights.

Whether the text of Grotius, therefore, is to be understood as confined, or not
confined to the case of contraband and blockade, it cannot possibly be applied to the
case of a trade asserted to be unlawful in war, merely as being a trade not permitted in
peace.

It may be observed nevertheless, in justice to Grotius, that his meaning, ought in
fairness, not to be extended beyond the cases of contraband and blockades: First,
because it is the only construction that can satisfy one part of the text; whilst the terms
used in the other part, are by no means, inconsistent with that construction. The
expression least apposite to the case of a blockade, is that of “pax expectabatur,” or
“the expectation of peace,” as an event which might be frustrated by the neutral
commerce. But there may certainly be wars, where peace itself might depend on a
blockade. It is obvious that a blockade of particular ports, such as that of Amsterdam,
the chief emporium of the country of Grotius, might influence the question of peace,
as well as the question of capitulation. Or to state a case still more decisive: a state at
war, may consist of little more than the place actually blockaded. Venice and Genoa,
formerly, Hamburgh at present, are examples. A close and continued blockade of such
places as these, would necessarily involve a question of peace, with that of a
surrender.


Again; the meaning of Grotius ought not to be extended, as Mr. Ward extends it,
beyond those two cases of contraband and blockade “to the general plan of operations,
and the general exigencies of a state of hostility;” because this construction is directly
at variance with the principle heretofore cited from Grotius; particularly in the note
where he condemns the practice of England and Holland, in their general prohibition
of neutral trade with their enemy.

But the construction attempted by Mr. Ward not only puts Grotius at variance with
himself; it puts Mr. Ward at variance with himself also; as well as with the limits
affixed to the principle by his own government. For if the belligerent right laid down
in the passage of Grotius be not restricted to contraband and blockades, and cannot be
applied to the British distinction between a trade in war and a trade in peace; but
extends to the general exigency of hostilities; it is impossible to deny to belligerents a
right to intercept all neutral trade with their enemy, whenever the state of the war, the
accomplishment of justice, or the expectation of peace, prescribe it; or whenever a
neutral trade may be calculated to confirm an enemy in the war. The consequence is
inevitable, Yet Mr. Ward, expressly,* in another place, disclaims any such a latitude
in the rights of war, with an exultation that his country had once, and once only,
attempted it; and, on seeing its injustice, candidly renounced the attempt.

The observations which have been already made on Pufendorf, and on his letter to
Groningius, cited by Barbeyrac, afford a conclusive reply to the use which Mr. Ward
faintly endeavors to make of that authority, on the point here in question. He seems,
indeed, in general, rather to combat it as an authority claimed by an opponent, than to
claim it as of much weight in his own scale.

Bynkershoeck and Heineccius, though jointly cited as explicit authority for the
principle that free ships do not make free goods, are neither of them appealed to by
Mr. Ward as supporting the principle that a trade not allowed in peace was unlawful
in war. This silence of Mr. Ward, considering his spirit of research, and his zeal for
this latter principle, may reasonably be ascribed to his discovery that he could gain
nothing by bringing it to the test of those authorities.

The same inference may be drawn from his silence with respect to the authority of
Vattel, as to a trade of that description.

In Hubner, whose authority it is a great object with Mr. Ward to discredit, he finds a
half concession, to which he does not fail to summon a marked attention. Hubner, it
seems, referring* to the case of a neutral trade with an enemy’s colonies opened on
account of the war, admits that it is subject to some uncertainty, “quelque incertitude.”
He immediately subjoins, however, “that he does not see why neutral sovereigns
should refuse themselves so considerable a benefit when it offers; provided they
abstain from supplying those colonies with any merchandize which is prohibited in
war. It is true,” he adds, “if, besides that, they are careful not to carry provisions
thither, by which I mean, articles of the first and second necessity, which, in time of
war, are fully and more than equivalent to contraband of war properly so called; then
it is evident that neutral nations may lawfully carry on that commerce, because the
principal cause of its being opened to them during the war, will not have had the


effect intended to be produced; by means of which that commerce will no longer have
any thing that may directly influence the war, and which consequently may be an
object of the right which belligerent nations have of opposing every thing which tends
to the immediate assistance of their enemies.” In this ramble of Hubner, from the
plain path in which he commenced his answer to the uncertainty suggested by
himself, he bewilders both himself and his subject, and lays a foundation for real
uncertainties, in his attempt to remove an imaginary one. How could distinctions be
maintained, in practice, between provisions of the first and those of the second
necessity, and between both and all other provisions? What is meant by the right
which belligerent nations have of opposing every thing, which tends to the immediate
assistance of their enemies?

But were the concession free from these incumbrances, it could not avail the
advocates for the British doctrine: First, because the concession is limited to the
colonial trade, not extending even to the coasting trade: Secondly, because it is limited
to the case of those necessary supplies to the colonies, which were the object in
opening the trade to neutrals; whereas the British doctrine extends to all trade to and
from the colonies.

If any thing further be requisite to invalidate this fugitive concession, or rather
hesitation of Hubner, it is amply furnished by Hubner himself, in sec. 5, of the same
chap. and book, in which he systematically establishes principles, by which the rights
of neutral commerce are to be determined.

“But let us suppose,” says he, “that the commerce of a neutral nation with one of the
belligerent parties, however innocent it may be, should indirectly strengthen the latter,
does it follow, that his adversary has a right to hinder it, to the detriment of the neutral
nation? who, in carrying it on, neither had nor could have that particular object in
view; which merely exercises her industry as in time of peace; and which, besides,
will be very glad to trade with that same adversary, upon the like terms, as far as his
commercial laws will permit, and the nature and interest of its own commerce may
require.

“To attempt to render a neutral State responsible for the increase of the strength of an
enemy, because that increase arises from the commerce which that State carries on
with him, is to impute to one, a thing which he has caused by mere accident.”

Again—“Neutral nations by trading with those who are at war, merely avail
themselves of their incontestible right. Now whoever makes use of his right, and
merely does so, never can do an injury to another, which he can have a right to
complain of. The possible consequences of just, innocent, and lawful acts, never can
hinder us from doing them, at least there is no one who has a right to prohibit us, &c.”

With such principles in his mind, it is not wonderful, that if Hubner was startled, as
Mr. Ward expresses it, by the terms of his own premises, he should be more startled at
his own concession; and that finding himself at a loss to explain the ground on which
such a claim as that of Great Britain could in any degree be reconciled with the rights
of neutral commerce, he should be in a hurry to resume his principle, “that there is no


reason why sovereign States who are neuter, should refuse the advantage presenting
itself, provided they abstain from supplying colonies with contraband.”

Hubner wrote in the war of 1756. Another Danish writer, Hennings, published a
treatise on “neutrality,” in the interval between the war of 1778 and the war of 1793.
His authority is precise and peremptory against Mr. Ward.

After the capture of Grenada, and the Grenadines by the French, in the war of 1778,
an act was passed by the British parliament* to “protect goods or merchandize of the
growth, produce, or manufacture of those islands, on board neutral vessels bound to
neutral ports during the present hostilities,” with provisoes, that the protection should
not extend to cargoes from any other island, nor affect any sentence of any vice
admiralty court, which prior to a given day should have condemned productions of the
said islands.

There is some obscurity in the object and the text of this act. To make it consistent,
however, with itself, as well as with the acknowledgment on all hands, that a neutral
trade in neutral property was free, during that period, with French colonies, it must be
understood, as intended either to exempt the trade of those islands, which had become
French, from the operation of British laws, and to put them on the same footing with
other French islands; or to exempt from capture the property of the inhabitants of the
islands, become French property and French subjects; an indulgence† that might be
thought due to those who had but just ceased to be British subjects, and who might be
restored to that character by a peace.*

Hennings, however, conceiving the act to have been intended to legalize a neutral
trade with French colonies, which otherwise might be subjected by the British courts
to condemnation, is led to the following assertion of the law of nations in opposition
to such a principle:

“An important subject which ought to be here noticed, is the trade with the colonies in
America. Is there any principle on which the sugar islands in the West Indies ought to
be considered as blockaded? And if there is no such principle, why is the permission
of Great Britain required for neutral ships to take sugars from the islands of Grenada
and the Grenadines, since those islands have fallen into the hands of the French, and
the French had opened a free trade to Martinico, and to their other islands, &c.?”

“This law is evidently contrary to the rights of neutral powers, and they might refuse
to acknowledge its obligation, as France alone has a right to permit or prohibit trading
with her colonies, and as long as she permits it, no neutral ought to be molested
therein.”

Hubner and Hennings appear to be the only writers who have taken notice of the
principle in question. The former having written at a period when the principle was in
operation was doubtless influenced by that consideration. The attention of the latter
seems to have been drawn to the subject by the act of parliament concerning Grenada
and the Grenadines, which he was inserting in his collection of State papers, and by
the construction which he gave to the purport of that act.


The other numerous writers of most modern date, though generally strenuous
advocates for the neutral rights of commerce, make no allusion to the British
principle: For it would be absurd to regard in the light of an allusion to, and
consequently a recognition of this particular principle, the language they happen to
use in stating the general principle, that when war arises between some nations, the
nations at peace with all, are to proceed in their trade with all, on the same footing in
time of war as they did before the war broke out. The obvious meaning of these
phrases is, that with the particular exceptions of contraband and blockades made by
all of them, the neutral right to trade with a nation at war remains the same as if that
nation was at peace; and consequently the right to trade to whatever places, in
whatever articles, and in whatever vessels, their regulations might mutually permit.
That such must have been the intention of such writers as Galiani, Azuni, and even
Lampredi, as well as of Schlegel and the German writers, cannot be questioned,
without setting up a forced construction of a particular phrase, in opposition to the
whole tenor of their publications; without supposing that whilst they contend for the
general system of the armed neutrality, of which this is an essential principle, and
have for their main object the enlargement of neutral rights, they could, by a loose
stroke of the pen sacrifice a neutral right, far more important than those which they
took up their pens to maintain. Such suppositions cannot for a moment be entertained.
Nor indeed have any of the partizans of Great Britain undertaken to advance them.

With respect to the opinion of these very late writers, indeed, it is impossible to doubt
that their sentiments are in opposition to the belligerent principle of Great Britain. If
they have not been more expressly so, their silence is readily explained by the period
when they wrote, that is, after the abandonment of the principle during the war of
1778, and before their attention could be called to the subject by the occurrences of
the war of 1793. As late even as the year 1799, it was affirmed at the bar of the high
court of admiralty, that “in the late practice of this court, during this war, there have
been a variety of cases from the French and Dutch colonies, in which the court has
either ordered further proof, or restored in the first instance.”* And in a prior case, in
the same year, Sir William Scott in reply to an argument at the bar, that the illegality
of a trade between the mother countries and their West Indies had been in a good
measure abandoned in the decisions of the lords of appeal, does not pretend that any
contrary decisions had taken place. He says only—“I am not acquainted with any
decision to that effect; and I doubt very much whether any decision yet made has
given even an indirect countenance to this supposed dereliction of a principle rational
in itself, and conformable to all general reasoning on the subject.”† Even the orders of
council, commencing in January, 1793, could not have been known to these writers;
and if they had, were so loosely expressed, so frequently changed, and had their
effects as so great a distance from European jurists, that the innovation could not be
expected to become an immediate subject of their attention and discussion.

To the incidental hesitation of Hubner, then, opposed by his own deliberate
explanation of his principles, are to be opposed the direct authority of one of his
countrymen, and the unanimous authority of a host of modern writers, all of a date
later than Hubner, and many of them more distinguished for their talents and their
erudition on subjects of public law.


It will be found that Mr. Ward is not more successful in his definitions and reasonings
on this subject, than in his appeal to the authority of Jurists.

That the obscurity and uncongruity into which this heresy in public law betrays the
votaries who engage in its defence, may be the better seen, Mr. Ward shall be
exhibited in his own words:

“Let it be remembered, therefore, that the question on the part of the belligerent is not,
as has been grossly supposed, whether he has a right to interfere with the neutral; but
merely whether he cannot prevent the neutral from interfering with him? In other
words, whether, when the former extends the bounds of his trade not with but for a
belligerent; not only purchases what he wants for his own consumption, or sells his
usual peace supply of articles; but sells to him articles which may be easily converted
into the means of annoyance; or even turns carrier for his oppressed friend who uses
the surplus strength which is thus afforded him against his opponent; whether in such
case the other belligerent has no reason to be offended, and to reclaim those rights
which the pretended neutral is disposed to deny him? This is in fact the true state of
the question.”*

“In granting, therefore, the fair and reasonable enjoyment of their privileges to neutral
nations, there must always be added the fair and reasonable caution that they use them
so as not to hurt the belligerent; and that I may not seem to entrench myself in general
‘ubi sœpe versatur error,’ I would add that they have certainly no right to use them in
any one, the smallest degree more than they did in times of peace, nor even in so great
a degree, if such augmented, or the ordinary use of them, bears immediate mischief to
either belligerent. For example, they may increase their purchases to any amount in
the belligerent countries, provided their own consumption required it, and provided
they remain domiciled in their own country. But if they persist in carrying, much
more, if they extend their faculty of carrying for the belligerent, where the latter was
in the habit of carrying before; and if, in consequence, he is enabled to come to the
battle, and to stand the shock of war, with augmented strength, which he never would
nor could have possessed without it, I see little or no difference between this and an
actual loan of military assistance. All the distinction is, that he substitutes his own
people in the place of taking foreigners, for every man which the neutral lends to his
trade enables him to furnish a man to his own hostile fleets. In other words, it enables
him to meet his enemy with undiminished forces, and yet preserve entire his sources
of revenue; when, if it was not for this conduct of the neutral, either the forces or the
revenue of the belligerent must be diminished.*

“According to our principles, the same reason which applies to contraband, applies to
all nocent cases whatsoever.”

A complaint in general terms that a power, which had hitherto stood by, should step in
and do that for the belligerent which he was no longer able to do himself, introduces
the following passage: “to come a little more into the detail and application of this
argument, let us suppose, as was the case with France, a heavy duty on foreign freight
had formed an almost fundamental law of her own commercial code; which in times
of peace, was a kind of navigation act amounting to an interdiction of foreign


interference; and that of a sudden, while engaged in war, wanting her sailors, perhaps
her merchant ships, for hostile expeditions, at the same time wanting the pecuniary
and other sources of her trade, which would thus be extinguished, she applied to
nations calling themselves neutral, by taking off this duty, or even by bounties, to
carry on this trade. Here is a proof how necessary this trade is to her exigencies, and
how impossible it is to preserve it, consistently with her warfare. But where is the
man of plain understanding, and uninterested in the question, who would not
determine, that if the neutral accepted the offer, that instant he interfered in the war,
&c.?”†

“These observations apply very generally to all the carrying trade, but they more
particularly apply to that specific claim in the first article of the armed neutrality of
1780, to navigate freely on the coasts, and from port to port of nations at war. In so far
as the coasting trade of a nation is more valuable and more necessary to its existence
than its foreign commerce; in just so far is the interposition of neutrals more powerful
in its favor.”‡

These extracts cannot be charged with perverting or mutilating the argumentative part
of Mr. Ward’s vindication of the belligerent claim in question.

The views of this claim, which Mr. Ward here gives, are, it must be confessed, so
vague and so confused that it is difficult to fix on the real meaning of the writer. As
far as it can be reduced to any thing like precision, he appears to be at variance with
himself; and what is perhaps, not less extraordinary, at variance with Sir William
Scott; sometimes going beyond the belligerent claims of the judge, and sometimes
relinquishing a part of them.

Thus, on comparing him with himself, he first allows neutrals to increase their
purchases to any amount; provided their own consumption require it. He next states,
that the neutral privilege is not only not to be used in the smallest degree more than in
peace, but not in the ordinary degree, if it bears immediate mischief to either
belligerent. Finally, he maintains, that the same reason which applies to contraband,
applies to all nocent cases whatsoever.

On comparing him with Sir William Scott, Mr. Ward admits that neutrals have a right
to trade, so far as to purchase and increase their purchases, to the amount of their own
consumption. It has been sufficiently seen that Sir William Scott, and indeed his
superiors both in the admiralty and executive departments, consider the trade of
neutrals, beyond the permission to trade in peace, as merely a relaxation of the rights
of war. Here then he stops short of Sir William Scott.

If we are not to consider that, as his real meaning, but pass on to his next position,
which denies to neutrals a trade, even in the ordinary degree, if it bears immediate
mischief to a belligerent (by which the context will not permit us to understand any
possible allusion to contraband) he here expressly contradicts Sir William Scott, who
lays it down with emphasis “that the general rule is, that the neutral has a right to
carry on in time of war, his accustomed trade, to the utmost extent of which that
accustomed trade is capable.”


If we recur to his last and most rigorous position, that all nocent cases whatever are
within the reason applicable to contraband; he must be still more extensively at
variance with Sir William Scott.

In support of the claim, whatever be the extent in which he means to give it, Mr. Ward
urges the unlawfulness of a neutral trade, which “is not with, but for an enemy.” This
has been a very favorite phrase with the patrons of the British claim. It probably was
first used in expressing the fiction by which neutral ships, licensed to trade with the
French colonies, were converted into French ships. In its application to the subsequent
pretext, which determines the channel of trade itself to be unlawful, it is not easy to
find any distinct signification: If by trading for an enemy be meant, carrying in neutral
vessels enemy’s property, the phrase has no connection with the present question;
which is not, whether enemy’s property in a neutral ship be liable to capture, but
whether neutral property in a neutral ship, in a particular channel, be a lawful trade: If
by trading for an enemy be meant, carrying to or from his ports, neutral property,
where he used to carry it himself; then it cannot be any thing more than trading with,
not for him, during the war; as he traded with, not for the neutral nation, before the
war; and the case is nothing more than a relaxation of a navigation act: If by trading
with an enemy be meant, carrying neutral articles of trade, which he would neither
carry himself nor permit to be carried by neutrals before the war, but the carriage of
which he permits both to neutrals and to himself during the war; this can no more be
tradingfor,notwithhim, than it was tradingfor,notwitheach other, for either to carry to
the other during war or peace, articles at one time prohibited, and then permitted by
the other; and the case is nothing more than a relaxation with respect to the articles of
commerce; as the former was a relaxation with respect to the vessels transporting the
articles. The same distinctions and inferences are generally applicable where
particular ports shut, at one time, come to be opened, at another.

The essence of the argument supposed to be compressed into this equivocal phrase,
thus, evaporates altogether in the analysis. It either means nothing that is true, or
nothing that is to the purpose.

But the real hinge on which the reasoning of Mr. Ward turns, is, the injury resulting to
one belligerent, from the advantage given to another, by a neutral whose ships and
mariners carry on a trade previously carried on by the belligerent himself, and which,
consequently, enables the belligerent to employ his own ships and mariners in the
operations of war; without even relinquishing the revenue which has its sources in
commerce. Between this and an actual loan of military assistance by the neutral, Mr.
Ward can see no difference; and this is the most plausible consideration perhaps
which could be urged in the cause which he defends.

But unfortunately for this defence, it is completely subverted by three other
considerations:

1. The argument is just as applicable to cases where the vessels of the nation, before it
was at war, were actually employed, without any legal exclusion of those of the
neutral nation, as to cases where there was a legal exclusion of foreign vessels before,
and a legal admission of them during, the war. In both cases, the belligerent vessels


and seamen, as far as they are liberated by the substitution of foreign vessels and
seamen, may be added to his military strength, without any diminution of his exports
and imports, or of the revenues connected with them. Either, therefore, the argument
must be extended (which will not be undertaken) to the latter case, or it loses its force,
as to the former.

2. It has been shewn that Great Britain does herself, thus relax her navigation act; and
avowedly for the purposes of substituting neutral vessels and mariners in place of
those which she finds it expedient to employ in the operations of war. Mr. Ward must
therefore either relinquish his argument, or condemn the practice of his own
government.

3. This fundamental argument of Mr. Ward is expressly thrown out of the question by
Sir William Scott, who admits that Great Britain, like all countries, in all wars, relaxes
her navigation acts and other regulations founded thereon, in order to obtain the
service of foreigners with their vessels, where she did without it in times of peace; but
that these relaxations, though they arise out of a state of war, do not arise from that
predominance of force which he takes to be the true foundation of the principle.*

When Mr. Ward then asks, “where is the man of plain understanding, and uninterested
in the question, who would not determine, that if the neutral accepted the offer, [of a
trade from which the ships and seamen of the belligerent were withdrawn for the
purposes of war,] that instant he interfered in the war?” A man may be named whose
determination of the question, Mr. Ward, as may be inferred from his eulogies on Sir
William Scott, would of all men be the last to contest.

On turning to the work of Mr. Browne, it does not appear that he has presented any
views of the subject, which require particular examination. He has, in fact, done little
more than appeal to the authority of Sir William Scott, and praise and repeat the
arguments of Mr. Ward.

It may be thought, that some notice ought to be taken of a discourse of the present
Earl of Liverpool, prefixed to his collection of treaties. It would be injustice to the
distinguished author of that defence of the maritime principles of Great Britain, to
deny it the merit of learning, ingenuity, and a vein of candor more than is always
found in such discussions. His attention, however, was almost wholly directed to the
question whether free ships make free goods, a question not within the limits of this
investigation. He has, indeed, a few cursory observations, such as could not be here
noticed without going into unnecessary repetitions, in favor of the doctrine that a trade
not customary in peace cannot be lawful in war. These observations, he concludes,
with one referred to by Mr. Ward as of great force, on the general question between
belligerent and neutral nations; namely, “that if this right were admitted, it would be
the interest of all commercial States to promote dissentions among their neighbors.”

If there be any plausibility in this argument, it is certainly all the merit that can be
claimed for it. The wars which afflict mankind, are not produced by the intrigues or
cupidity of the weaker nations, who wish to remain in peace, whilst their neighbors
are at war. They are the offspring of ambitious, and not unfrequently commercial


rivalships, among the more powerful nations themselves. This is a fact attested by all
history. If maxims of public law are to be tested, therefore, by their pacific tendency,
such maxims, it is evident, must be favored as circumscribing, not the rights and
interests of neutral nations, but the belligerent and commercial interests, of their more
powerful and warlike neighbors.

As a further answer to the observations of this noble author, and as a final answer to
all the arguments which are drawn from the intrinsic equity or conveniency of this
principle, the following considerations must have weight with all candid and
competent judges.

In the first place it may be repeated, that on a question which is to be decided, not by
the abstract precepts of reason, but by the rules of law positively in force, it is not
sufficient to show on which side an intrinsic reasonableness can be traced. It is
necessary to shew, on which side the law as in force, is found to be. In the present
case, it has been shewn that this law is not for, but against, the British side of the
question.

But secondly, it is denied that if reason, equity, or conveniency, were alone to decide
the question, the decision would be different from that which the law in force
pronounces on it.

War imposes on neutral commerce a variety of privations and embarrassments. It is
reasonable, therefore, as well as lawful, that neutrals should enjoy the advantages
which may happen to arise from war.

1. In the case of contraband, the articles of which, especially according to the British
catalogue, may compose an important branch of exports in time of peace, the
commerce of particular nations remaining at peace may suffer material defalcations
from the exercise of the rights of war.

2. In the case of enemy’s property carried by neutral ships, (as Great Britain, at least,
understands and enforces the law of nations,) a branch of trade more or less important
to all commercial nations, and constituting the most profitable branch of trade with
some in times of peace, becomes an object of belligerent interruption and
confiscation.

3. In the case of blockades the abridgment and embarrassment to which the trade of
neutrals, especially those at a distance, is subjected by war, form other important
items of loss on their side. This is a belligerent claim, on which much might be said, if
the notoriety of its effects, to say nothing of its extravagant abuses, did not render it
unnecessary.

4. The interruptions, proceeding from searches of neutral vessels on the high seas, the
erroneous suspicions and inferences which send them into port for trial, the difficulty
of obtaining all the requisites proofs thereon by the claimant, the delays and expences
incident to the judicial proceedings, more especially where the trial is at a great
distance, and above all when appeals still more distant become necessary, the changes


in the state of markets during all these delays, which convert into loss the gains
promised by the expedition, the suspension of the mercantile funds, the heavy
sacrifices, and sometimes bankruptcies thence ensuing; all these injuries, which war
brings on neutral commerce, taken together, must surely, during war, require a very
great weight in the opposite scale to balance them, and the weight of these injuries is
sometimes not a little increased by the piracies which a state of war generates and
emboldens.

The injuries, besides, which are here enumerated, are limited to such proceedings as
the laws of war may be thought to authorize. To a fair estimate of the evils suffered by
neutral commerce, must be added all those abuses which never fail to be mingled with
the exercise of belligerent rights on the high seas; the protracted interruptions, the
personal insults, the violent or furtive spoliations, with a thousand irregularities,
which are more or less inseparable from the proceeding, and which can seldom be so
far verified and prosecuted to effect against the wrong-doers, as to amount to a
reparation.

If the evils, brought on neutrals by a state of war, were to be traced to their full extent,
a long list of a distinct kind ought moreover to be thrown into the same scale. How
many condemnations are made either directly contrary to the law of nations, or by
means of unjust presumptions, or abitrary rules of evidence, against neutral claimants!
How often and how severely are the neutral appellants aggrieved by measuring the
restitution awarded to them, not according to the actual loss, but according to the
deficient estimates, or the scanty proceeds of sales, decreed by ignorant or corrupt
vice admiralty courts,* in places and under circumstances, which reduce the price to a
mere fraction of the value! Examples of this sort might easily be multiplied; but they
may be thought of the less weight in the present case, as they furnish a just ground of
resort from the ordinary tribunals of justice, to those ulterior remedies, which depend
on negotiations and arrangements between the belligerent and neutral governments.
But whatever may be the provisions for indemnity, obtained in these modes, it
remains an important truth on the present subject, that besides the intermediate
disadvantage to neutral traders from the mere delay of diplomatic and conventional
remedies, the justice stipulated is always rendered very incomplete, by the difficulties
in verifying the losses and damages sustained.

The principle urged against a neutral trade in time of war, not permitted in peace, is
the more unreasonable, because it gives to a tribunal established by the belligerent
party only, a latitude of judgment improper to be confided to courts of justice,
however constituted.*

In cases, even where the tribunal has an equal relation to both the parties, it has ever
been deemed proper, that the rules of decision should be as plain and as determinate
as possible; in order not only, that they might be the surer guide to those who are to
observe them; but also a better guard against the partialities and errors of those who
are to apply them. Say, then, whether it be not an abandonment of every reasonable
precaution, while the judges have in their national prejudices, in the tenure of their
official emoluments, and in their hopes of personal advancements, an exclusive
relation to one of the parties; say whether it be not unreasonable to leave to the


opinion, perhaps to the conjectures of a tribunal so composed, the questions whether
in a distant quarter of the globe a particular trade* was or was not allowed before the
war, whether if not allowed before the war, its allowance during the war, proceeded
from causes distinct from the war, or arising out of the war; whether the allowance
had or had not been common to all wars; whether again, if resulting from the
particular pressure of the war, the pressure amounted to a necessity; whether if
amounting to a necessity, the necessity resulted from an impossibility, imposed by a
decided predominance and superiority at sea, of the adverse party? These are not
questions of fancy or of unfairness. They are questions which it has been seen, that
the enlightened judge in the British high court of admiralty has himself recognized as
involved in the principle for which he contends. But they are questions in their nature
improper to be decided by any judicial authority whatever; and in their importance,
they are questions too great to be left even to the sovereign authority of a country
where the rights of other sovereigns are to be the object of the decision.

Finally:—The belligerent claim, to intercept a neutral trade in war not open in peace,
is rendered still more extravagantly preposterous and pernicious, by the latitude which
it is now assuming. According to late decisions in the British courts, it is in future to
be a rule, that produce of an enemy’s colony, lawfully imported into a neutral country,
and incorporated into its commercial stock, as far as the ordinary regulations of a
sovereign State can work such an effect, is to be subject on re-exportation to capture
and condemnation; unless it can be shewn that it was imported in the preceeding
voyage, with an intention that it should not be re-exported. Consider for a moment the
indignity offered to a neutral sovereign in subjecting the integrity of its internal
regulations to the scrutiny of foreign courts, and to the interested suspicions of
belligerent cruizers; consider the oppression on the individual traders, inseparable
from a trial in a distant court, and perhaps an appeal to another court still more distant,
where the intention of an antecedent voyage is to be traced through all the labyrinth of
mercantile transactions. A neutral vessel goes to sea, with a cargo consisting, in whole
or in part, of colonial produce. It may be the produce of a neutral colony. It may be
the produce of the country exporting it: The United States already produce cotton,
sugar, rice, &c., as well as the West Indies. The cruizer does not forget, that the proof
will probably be thrown on the claimants; that besides the possibility that it may be a
licensed capture, the difficulty of proof may have the same effect in producing
condemnation. He recollects also that in the event of an acquittal the costs* will,
where there is the least color for seizure, be thrown on the claimants; and that, at the
worst, he can only be put to the inconvenience of giving up a few men to take charge
of the prize, in exchange for a few others, not unfrequently impressed into the
vacancy. In a word, his calculation is, that he may gain, and cannot lose. Will not,
under such circumstances, every hogshead of sugar, or bale of cotton, or barrel of
rum, &c., be a signal for detention? Could ingenuity devise a project holding out a
more effectual premium for the multiplication of vexations searches and seizures,
beyond even the ordinary proportion of condemnations? A project, in fact, more
unjust in itself, more disrespectful to neutral notions, or more fatal to the liberty and
interests of neutral commerce? Would Great Britain be patient under such
proceedings against her, if she held in her hands, the means of controuling them? If
she will not answer for herself all the world will answer for her, that she would not,
and what is more, that she ought not.