Notes on Nullification
======================
Date: 1835-1836
Source: Hunt Edition, The Writings of James Madison, Vol. 9

NOTES ON NULLIFICATION.1

1835. 6.        Mad. Mss.

Altho’ the Legislature of Virginia declared at a late session almost unanimously, that
S. Carolina was not supported in her doctrine of nullification by the Resolutions of
1798, it appears that those resolutions are still appealed to as expressly or
constructively favoring the doctrine.

That the doctrine of nullification may be clearly understood it must be taken as laid
down in the Report of a special committee of the House of Representatives of S. C. in
1828. In that document it is asserted, that a single State has a constitutional right to
arrest the execution of a law of the U. S. within its limits; that the arrest is to be
presumed right and valid, and is to remain in force unless ¾ of the States, in a
Convention, shall otherwise decide.

The forbidding aspect of a naked creed, according to which a process instituted by a
single State is to terminate in the ascendancy of a minority of 7, over a majority of 17,
has led its partizans to disguise its deformity under the position that a single State may
rightfully resist an unconstitutional and tyrannical law of the U. S., keeping out of
view the essential distinction between a constitutional right and the natural and
universal right of resisting intolerable oppression. But the true question is whether a
single state has a constitutional right to annul or suspend the operation of a law of the
U. S. within its limits, the State remaining a member of the Union, and admitting the
Constitution to be in force.

With a like policy, the nullifiers pass over the state of things at the date of the
proceedings of Vira and the particular doctrines and arguments to which they were
opposed; without an attention to which the proceedings in this as in other cases may
be insecure agst a perverted construction.

It must be remarked also that the champions of nullification, attach themselves
exclusively to the 3. Resolution, averting their attention from the 7. Resolution which
ought to be coupled with it, and from the Report also, which comments on both, &
gives a full view of the object of the Legislature on the occasion.

Recurring to the epoch of the proceedings, the facts of the case are that Congs had
passed certain acts, bearing the name of the alien and sedition laws, which Virg. &
some of the other States, regarded as not only dangerous in their tendency, but
unconstitutional in their text; and as calling for a remedial interposition of the States.
It was found also that not only was the constitutionality of the acts vindicated by a
predominant party, but that the principle was asserted at the same time, that a sanction
to the acts given by the supreme Judicial authority of the U. S. was a bar to any
interposition whatever on the part of the States, even in the form of a legislative
declaration that the acts in question were unconstitutional.

Under these circumstances, the subject was taken up by Virga. in her resolutions, and
pursued at the ensuing session of the Legislature in a comment explaining and
justifying them; her main and immediate object, evidently being, to produce a
conviction everywhere, that the Constitution had been violated by the obnoxious acts
and to procure a concurrence and co-operation of the other States in effectuating a
repeal of the acts. She accordingly asserted and offered her proofs at great length, that
the acts were unconstitutional. She asserted moreover & offered her proofs that the
States had a right in such cases, to interpose, first in their constituent character to
which the govt of the U. S. was responsible, and otherwise as specially provided by
the Constitution; and further, that the States, in their capacity of parties to and creators
of the Constitution, had an ulterior right to interpose, notwithstanding any decision of
a constituted authority; which, however it might be the last resort under the forms of
the Constitution in cases falling within the scope of its functions, could not preclude
an interposition of the States as the parties which made the Constitution and, as such,
possessed an authority paramount to it.

In this view of the subject there is nothing which excludes a natural right in the States
individually, more than in any portion of an individual State, suffering under palpable
and insupportable wrongs, from seeking relief by resistance and revolution.

But it follows, from no view of the subject, that a nullification of a law of the U. S.
can as is now contended, belong rightfully to a single State, as one of the parties to the
Constitution; the State not ceasing to avow its adherence to the Constitution. A plainer
contradiction in terms, or a more fatal inlet to anarchy, cannot be imagined.

And what is the text in the proceedings of Virginia which this spurious doctrine of
nullification claims for its parentage? It is found in the 3d of the Resolutions of -98,
which is in the following words.

“That in case of a deliberate, a palpable & dangerous exercise of powers not granted
by the [constitutional] compact, the States who are parties thereto have a right and are
in duty bound to interpose for arresting the progress of the evil, & for maintaining
within their respective limits, the authorities rights & liberties appertaining to them.”

Now is there anything here from which a single State can infer a right to arrest or
annul an act of the General Govt which it may deem unconstitutional? So far from it,
that the obvious & proper inference precludes such a right on the part of a single
State; plural number being used in every application of the term.

In the next place, the course & scope of the reasoning requires that by the rightful
authority to interpose in the cases & for the purposes referred to, was meant, not the
authority of the States singly & separately, but their authority as the parties to the
Constn, the authority which, in fact, made the Constitution; the authority which being
paramount to the Constitution was paramount to the authorities constituted by it, to
the Judiciary as well as the other authorities. The resolution derives the asserted right
of interposition for arresting the progress of usurpations by the Federal Govt from the
fact, that its powers were limited to the grant made by the States; a grant certainly not
made by a single party to the grant, but by the parties to the compact containing the

grant. The mode of their interposition, in extraordinary cases, is left by the Resolution
to the parties themselves; as the mode of interposition lies with the parties to other
Constitutions, in the event of usurpations of power not remediable, under the forms
and by the means provided by the Constitution. If it be asked why a claim by a single
party to the constitutional compact, to arrest a law, deemed by it a breach of the
compact, was not expressly guarded agst the simple answer is sufficient that a
pretension so novel, so anomalous & so anarchical, was not & could not be
anticipated.

In the third place, the nullifying claim for a single State is probably irreconcilable
with the effect contemplated by the interposition claimed by the Resolution for the
parties to the Constitution namely that of “maintaining within the respective limits of
the States the authorities rights & liberties appertaining to them.” Nothing can be
more clear than that these auths &c., &c., of the States, in other words, the authority &
laws of the U. S. must be the same in all; or that this cannot continue to be the case, if
there be a right in each to annual or suspend within itself the operation of the laws &
authority of the whole. There cannot be different laws in different states on subjects
within the compact without subverting its fundamental principles, and rendering it as
abortive in practice as it would be incongruous in theory. A concurrence & co-
operation of the States in favor of each, would have the effect of preserving the
necessary uniformity in all, which the Constitution so carefully & so specifically
provided for in cases where the rule might be in most danger of being violated. Thus
the citizens of every State are to enjoy reciprocally the privileges of citizens in every
other State. Direct taxes are to be apportioned on all, according to a fixed rule.
Indirect taxes are to be the same in all the States. The duties on imports are to be
uniform: No preference is to be given to the ports of one State over those of another.
Can it be believed, that with these provisions of the Constn illustrating its vital
principles fully in view of the Legislature of Virginia, that its members could in the
Resolution quoted, intend to countenance a right in a single State to distinguish itself
from its co-States, by avoiding the burdens, or restrictions borne by them; or
indirectly giving the law to them.

These startling consequences from the nullifying doctrine have driven its partizans to
the extravagant presumption that no State would ever be so unreasonable, unjust &
impolitic as to avail itself of its right in any case not so palpably just and fair as to
ensure a concurrence of the others, or at least the requisite proportion of them.

Omitting the obvious remark that in such a case the law would never have been
passed or immediately repealed; and the surprize that such a defence of the nullifying
right should come from S. C. in the teeth & at the time of her own example, the
presumption of such a forbearance in each of the States, or such a pliability in all,
among 20 or 30 independent sovereignties, must be regarded as a mockery by those
who reflect for a moment on the human character, or consult the lessons of
experience, not the experience of other countries & times, but that among ourselves;
and not only under the former defective Confederation, but since the improved system
took place of it. Examples of differences, persevering differences among the States on
the constitutionality of Federal acts, will readily occur to every one; and which would,
e’er this, have defaced and demolished the Union, had the nullifying claim of S.

Carolina been indiscriminately exercisable. In some of the States, the carriage-tax
would have been collected, in others unpaid. In some, the tariff on imports would be
collected; in others, openly resisted. In some, lighthouses wd be established; in others
denounced. In some States there might be war with a foreign power; in others, peace
and commerce. Finally, the appellate authority of the Supreme Court of the U. S.
would give effect to the Federal laws in some States, whilst in others they would be
rendered nullities by the State Judiciaries. In a word, the nullifying claims if reduced
to practice, instead of being the conservative principle of the Constitution, would
necessarily, and it may be said obviously, be a deadly poison.

Thus, from the 3d. resoln itself, whether regard be had to the employment of the term
States in the plural number, the argumentative use of it, or to the object namely the
“maintaining the authority & rights of each, which must be the same in all as in each,
it is manifest that the adequate interposition to which it relates, must be not a single,
but a concurrent interposition.

If we pass from the 3d to the 7th Resolution, which, tho’ it repeats and re-enforces the
3d and which is always skipped over by the nullifying commentators, the fallacy of
their claim will at once be seen. The resolution is in the following words. [“That the
good people of the commonwealth having ever felt and continuing to feel the most
sincere affection to their brethren of the other states, the truest anxiety for establishing
and perpetuating the union of all, and the most scrupulous fidelity to that Constitution
which is the pledge of mutual friendship and the instrument of mutual happiness, the
General Assembly doth solemnly appeal to the like dispositions in the other states, in
confidence that they will concur with this commonwealth in declaring, as it does
hereby declare, that the acts aforesaid are unconstitutional, and that the necessary and
proper measures will be taken by each for co-operating with this state in maintaining
unimpaired the authorities, rights, and liberties reserved in the states respectively or to
the people.”1 ] Here it distinctly appears, as in the 3d reoln that the course
contemplated by the Legislature, “for maintaining the authorities, rights, & liberties
reserved to the States respectively,” was not a solitary or separate interposition, but a
co-operation in the means necessary & proper for the purpose.

If a further elucidation of the view of the Legislature could be needed, it happens to
be found in its recorded proceedings. In the 7th Resolution as originally proposed, the
term “unconstitutional,” was followed by null void, &c. These added words being
considered by some as giving pretext for some disorganizing misconstruction, were
unanimously stricken out, or rather withdrawn by the mover of the Resolutions.

An attempt has been made, by ascribing to the words stricken out, a nullifying
signification, to fix on the reputed draftsman of the Resolution the character of a
nullifier. Could this have been effected, it would only have vindicated the Legislature
the more effectually from the imputation of favoring the doctrine of S. Carolina. The
unanimous erasure of nullifying expressions was a protest by the H. of Delegates, in
the most emphatic form against it.

But let us turn to the “Report,” which explained and vindicated the Resolutions; and
observe the light in which it placed first the third and then the 7th1

It must be recollected that this Document proceeded from Representatives chosen by
the people some months after the Resolutions had been before them, with a longer
period for manifesting their sentiments before the Report was adopted; and without
any evidence of disapprobation in the Constituent Body. On the contrary, it is known
to have been recd by the Republican party, a decided majority of the people, with the
most entire approbation. The Report therefore must be regarded as the most
authoritative evidence of the meaning attached by the State to the Resolutions. This
consideration makes it the more extraordinary, and let it be added the more
inexcusable, in those, who in their zeal to extract a particular meaning from a
particular resolution, not only shut their eyes to another Resolution, but to an
authentic exposition of both.

And what is the comment of the Report on that particular resolution?, namely, the 3d

In the first place, it conforms to the resolution in using the term which expresses the
interposing authy of the States, in the plural number States, not in the singular number
State. It is indeed impossible not to perceive that the entire current & complexion of
the observations explaining & vindicating the resolns. imply necessarily, that by the
interposition of the States for arresting the evil of usurpation, was meant a concurring
authy. not that of a single state; whilst the collective meaning of the term, gives
consistency & effect to the reasoning & the object.

But besides this general evidence that the Report in the invariable use of the plural
term States, withheld from a single State the right expressed in the Resoln. a still more
precise and decisive inference, to the same effect, is afforded by several passages in
the document.

Thus the report observes “The States then being the parties to the constl compact, and
in their highest sovereign capacity, it follows of necessity, that there can be no
tribunal above their authy to decide in the last resort, whether the compact made by
them be violated; and, consequently that as the parties to it, they must themselves
decide in the last resort such questions as may be of sufficient magnitude to require
their interposition.”

Now apart from the palpable insufficiency of an interposition by a single State to
effect the declared object of the interposition namely, to maintain authorities & rights
which must be the same in all the States, it is not true that there would be no tribunal
above the authority of a state as a single party; the aggregate authority of the parties
being a tribunal above it to decide in the last resort.

Again the language of the Report is, “If the deliberate exercise of dangerous powers
palpably withheld by the Constitution could not justify the parties to it in interposing
even so far as to arrest the progress of the evil, & thereby preserve the Constitun.
itself, as well as to provide for the safety of the parties to it, there wd be an end to all
relief from usurped power”—Apply here the interposing power of a single State, and
it would not be true that there wd be no relief from usurped power. A sure & adequate
relief would exist in the interposition of the States, as the co-parties to the
Constitution, with a power paramount to the Constn itself.

It has been said that the right of interposition asserted for the states by the proceedings
of Virginia could not be meant a right for them in their collective character of parties
to and creators of the Constitution, because that was a right by none denied. But as a
simple truth or truism, its assertion might not be out of place when applied as in the
resolution, especially in an avowed recurrence to fundamental principles, as in duty
called for by the occasion. What is a portion of the Declaration of Independence but a
series of simple and undeniable truths or truisms? what but the same composed a great
part of the Declarations of Rights prefixed to the state constitutions? It appears,
however, from the report itself, which explains the resolutions, that the last resort
claimed for the Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of the alien and
sedition laws, was understood to require a recurrence to the ulterior resort in the
authority from which that of the court was derived. “But, (continues the Report) it is
objected1 that the judicial authority is to be regarded as the sole expositor of the
Constn in the last resort.”

In answering this objection the Report observes, “that however true it may be that the
judicial Dept, in all questions submitted to it by the forms of the Constn. to decide in
the last resort, this resort must necessarily not be the last—in relation to the rights of
the parties to the constl compact from which the Judicial as well as the other
Departments hold their delegated trusts. On any other hypothesis, the Delegation of
judicial power wd annual the authy delegating it, and the concurrence of this Dept
with the others in usurped power, might subvert for ever, and beyond the possible
reach of any rightful remedy, the very Constiti which all were instituted to preserve.”
Again observes the report, “The truth declared in the resolution being established, the
expediency of making the declaration at the present day may safely be left to the
temperate consideration and candid judgment of the American public. It will be
remembered that a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is solemnly enjoined
by most of the State constitutions, and particularly by our own, as a necessary
safeguard against the danger of degeneracy, to which republics are liable as well as
other governments, though in a less degree than others. And a fair comparison of the
political doctrines, not unfrequent at the present day, with those which characterized
the epoch of our revolution, and which form the basis of our republican constitutions,
will best determine whether the declaratory recurrence here made to those principles
ought to be viewed as unreasonable and improper, or as a vigilant discharge of an
important duty. The authority of constitutions over governments, and of the
sovereignty of the people over constitutions, are truths which are at all times
necessary to be kept in mind; and at no time, perhaps, more necessary than at
present.”

Who can avoid seeing the necessity of understanding by the “parties” to the constl.
compact, the authority, which made the compact and from which all the Depts held
their delegated trusts. These trusts were certainly not delegated by a single party. By
regarding the term parties in its plural, not individual meaning, the answer to the
objection is clear and satisfactory. Take the term as meaning a party, and not the
parties, and there is neither truth nor argument in the answer. But further, on the
hypothesis, that the rights of the parties meant the rights of a party, it wd not be true
as affirmed by the Report, that “the Delegation of Judl. power wd annul the authy
delegating it, and that the concurrence of this Dept with others in usurped power

might subvert for ever, & beyond the reach of any rightful remedy, the very
Constitution wch all were instituted to preserve.” However deficient a remedial right
in a single State might be to preserve the Constn against usurped power an ultimate
and adequate remedy wd. always exist in the rights of the parties to the Constn in
whose hands the Constn is at all times but clay in the hands of the potter, and who
could apply a remedy by explaing amendg, or remakg it, as the one or the other mode
might be the most proper remedy.

Such being the comment of the Report on the 3d Resolution, it fully demonstrates the
meaning attached to it by Virginia when passing it, and rescues it from the nullifying
misconstruction into which the Resolution has been distorted.

Let it next be seen, how far the comment of the Rept. on the 7th Resoln. above inserted
accords with that on the 3d.; and that this may the more conveniently be scanned by
every eye, the comment is subjoined at full length.

[“The fairness and regularity of the course of proceedings here pursued have not
protected it against objections even from sources too respectable to be disregarded.

“It has been said that it belongs to the judiciary of the United States, and not to the
state legislatures, to declare the meaning of the federal Constitution.

“But a declaration that proceedings of the federal government are not warranted by
the Constitution, is a novelty neither among the citizens nor among the legislatures of
the states; are not the citizens or the Legislature of Virginia singular in the example of
it.

“Nor can the declarations of either, whether affirming or denying the constitutionality
of measures of the federal government, or whether made before or after judicial
decisions thereon, be deemed, in any point of view, an assumption of the office of the
judge. The declarations in such cases are expressions of opinions, unaccompanied
with any other effect than what they may produce on opinion by exciting reflection.
The expositions of the judiciary, on the other hand, are carried into immediate effect
by force. The former may lead to a change in the legislative expressions of the general
will; possibly to a change in the opinion of the judiciary; the latter enforces the
general will, while that will and that opinion continue unchanged.

“And if there be no impropriety in declaring the unconstitutionality of proceedings in
the federal government, where can be the impropriety of communicating the
declaration to other states, and inviting their concurrence in a like declaration? What
is allowable for one must be allowable for all; and a free communication among the
states, where the Constitution imposes no restraint, is as allowable among the state
governments as among other public bodies or private citizens. This consideration
derives a weight that cannot be denied to it, from the relation of the state legislatures
to the federal Legislature, as the immediate constituents of one of its branches.

“The legislatures of the states have a right also to originate amendments to the
Constitution, by a concurrence of two thirds of the whole number, in applications to

Congress for the purpose. When new states are to be formed by a junction of two or
more states or parts of states, the legislatures of the states concerned are, as well as
Congress, to concur in the measure. The states have a right also to enter into
agreements or compacts, with the consent of Congress. In all such cases, a
communication among them results from the object which is common to them.

“It is lastly to be seen whether the confidence expressed by the resolution, that the
necessary and proper measures would be taken by the other states for co-operating
with Virginia in maintaining the rights reserved to the states or to the people, be in
any degree liable to the objections which have been raised against it.

“If it be liable to objection, it must be because either the object or the means are
objectionable.

“The object being to maintain what the Constitution has ordered, is in itself a laudable
object.

“The means are expressed in the terms ‘the necessary and proper measures.’ A proper
object was to be pursued by means both necessary and proper.

“To find an objection, then, it must be shown that some meaning was annexed to
these general terms which was not proper; and, for this purpose, either that the means
used by the General Assembly were an example of improper means, or that there were
no proper means to which the term could refer.

“In the example given by the state, of declaring the alien and sedition acts to be
unconstitutional, and of communicating the declaration to the other states, no trace of
improper means has appeared. And if the other states had concurred in making a like
declaration, supported, too, by the numerous applications flowing immediately from
the people, it can scarcely be doubted that these simple means would have been as
sufficient as they are unexceptionable.

“It is no less certain that other means might have been employed which are strictly
within the limits of the Constitution. The legislatures of the states might have made a
direct representation to Congress, with a view to obtain a rescinding of the two
offensive acts; or they might have represented to their respective senators in Congress
their wish that two thirds thereof would propose an explanatory amendment to the
Constitution; or two thirds of themselves, if such had been their option, might, by an
application to Congress, have obtained a convention for the same object.

“These several means, though not equally eligible in themselves, nor probably to the
states, were all constitutionally open for consideration. And if the General Assembly,
after declaring the two acts to be unconstitutional, the first and most obvious
proceeding on the subject, did not undertake to point out to the other states a choice
among the farther means that might become necessary and proper, the reserve will not
be misconstrued by liberal minds into any culpable imputation.

“These observations appear to form a satisfactory reply to every objection which is
not founded on a misconception of the terms employed in the resolutions. There is

one other, however, which may be of too much importance not to be added. It cannot
be forgotten, that among the arguments addressed to those who apprehended danger
to liberty from the establishment of the general government over so great a country,
the appeal was emphatically made to the intermediate existence of the state
governments between the people and that government, to the vigilance with which
they would descry the first symptoms of usurpation, and to the promptitude with
which they would sound the alarm to the public. This argument was probably not
without its effect; and if it was a proper one then to recommend the establishment of
the Constitution, it must be a proper one now to assist in its interpretation.

“The only part of the two concluding resolutions that remains to be noticed, is the
repetition in the first of that warm affection to the Union and its members, and of that
scrupulous fidelity to the Constitution, which have been invariably felt by the people
of this state. As the proceedings were introduced with these sentiments, they could not
be more properly closed than in the same manner. Should there be any so far misled
as to call in question the sincerity of these professions, whatever regret may be
excited by the error, the General Assembly cannot descend into a discussion of it.
Those who have listened to the suggestion can only be left to their own recollection of
the part which this state has borne in the establishment of our national independence,
in the establishment of our national Constitution, and in maintaining under it the
authority and laws of the Union, without a single exception of internal resistance or
commotion. By recurring to these facts, they will be able to convince themselves that
the representations of the people of Virginia must be above the necessity of opposing
any other shield to attacks on their national patriotism than their own consciousness
and the justice of an enlightened public, who will perceive, in the resolutions
themselves, the strongest evidence of attachment both to the Constitution and to the
Union, since it is only by maintaining the different governments and departments
within their respective limits that the blessings of either can be perpetuated.”]

Here is certainly not a shadow of countenance to the doctrine of nullification. Under
every aspect, it enforces the arguments and authority agst such an apocryphal version
of the text.

From this view of the subject, those who will duly attend to the tenour of the
proceedings of Virga and to the circumstances of the period when they took place will
concur in the fairness of disclaiming the inference from the undeniableness of a truth,
that it could not be the truth meant to be asserted in the Resoln. The employment of
the truth asserted, and the reasons for it, are too striking to be denied or
misunderstood.

More than this, the remark is obvious, that those who resolve the nullifying claim into
the natural right to resist intolerable oppression, are precluded from inferring that to
be the right meant by the Resoln, since that is as little denied, as the paramountship of
the authy, creating a Constn over an authy derived from it.

The true question therefore is whether there be a constitutional right in a single state
to nullify a law of the U. S. We have seen the absurdity of such a claim in its naked
and suicidal form. Let us turn to it as modified by S. C., into a right in every State to

resist within itself, the execution of a Federal law deemed by it to be unconstitutional;
and to demand a Convention of the States to decide the question of constitutionality,
the annulment of the law to continue in the mean time, and to be permanent, unless ¾
of the states concur in over-ruling the annulment.

Thus, during the temporary nullification of the law, the results would be the same
from those proceeding from an unqualified nullification, and the result of a
convention might be, that 7 out of the 24 states, might make the temporary results
permanent. It follows, that any State which could obtain the concurrence of six others,
might abrogate any law of the U. S. constructively whatever, and give to the
Constitution any shape they please, in opposition to the construction and will of the
other seventeen, each of the 17 having an equal right & authority with each of the 7.
Every feature in the Constitution, might thus be successively changed; and after a
scene of unexampled confusion & distraction, what had been unanimously agreed to
as a whole, would not as a whole be agreed to by a single party. The amount of this
modified right of nullification is, that a single State may arrest the operation of a law
of the United States, and institute a process which is to terminate in the ascendency of
a minority over a large majority, in a Republican System, the characteristic rule of
which is that the major will is the ruling will. And this newfangled theory is attempted
to be fathered on Mr. Jefferson the apostle of republicanism, and whose own words
declare that “acquiescence in the decision of the majority is the vital principle of it.”
[See his Inaugural Address.]

Well might Virginia declare, as her Legislature did by a resolution of 1833 “that the
resolutions of 98-99, gave no support to the nullifying doctrine of South Carolina.
And well may the friends of Mr. J. disclaim any sanction to it or to any constitutional
right of nullification from his opinions. His memory is fortunately rescued from such
imputations, by the very Document procured from his files and so triumphantly
appealed to by the nullifying partisans of every description. In this Document, the
remedial right of nullification is expressly called a natural right, and, consequently,
not a right derived from the Constitution, but from abuses or usurpations, releasing
the parties to it from their obligation.1

It is said that in several instances the authority & laws of the U. S. have been
successfully nullified by the particular States. This may have occurred possibly in
urgent cases, and in confidence that it would not be at variance with the construction
of the Fedl Govt or in cases where, operating within the Nullifying State alone it
might be connived at as a lesser evil than a resort to force; or in cases not falling
within the Fedl jurisdiction; or finally in cases, deemed by the States, subversive of
their essential rights, and justified therefore, by the natural right of self-preservation.
Be all this as it may, examples of nullification, tho’ passing off witht any immediate
disturbance of the public order, are to be deplored, as weakeng the com?on Govt. and
as undermining the Union. One thing seems to be certain, that the States which have
exposed themselves to the charge of nullification, have, with the exception of S. C.,
disclaimed it as a constitutional right, and have moreover protested agst. it as modified
by the process of South Carolina.

The conduct of Pena. and the opinions of Judge McKean & Tilgman have been
particularly dwelt on by the nullifiers. But the final acquiescence of the state in the
authy of the Fedl Judiciary transfers their authy to the other scale, and it is believed
that the opinions of the two judges, have been superseded by those of their brethren,
which have been since & at the present time are, opposed to them.1

Attempts have been made to shew that the resolutions of Virginia contemplated a
forcible resistance to the alien & sedt laws and as evidence of it, the laws relating to
the armory, and a Habs corpus for the protection of members of her Legislature, have
been brought into view. It happens however, as has been ascertained by the recorded
dates that the first of these laws was enacted prior to the al. & sed. laws. As to the last,
it appears that it was a general law, providing for other emergencies as well as federal
arrests and its applicability never tested by any occurrence under the al. & sedn. laws.
The law did not necessarily preclude an acquiescence in the supervising decision of
the Fedl Judy shd that not sustain the Habs. corps which it might be calculated would
be sustained. And all must agree, that cases might arise, of such violations of the
security & privileges of representatives of the people, as would justify the states in a
resort to the natural law of self-preservation. The extent of the privileges of the fedl &
State representatives of the people, agst criminal charges by the 2 authorities
reciprocally, involves delicate questions which it may be better to leave for those who
are to decide on them, than unnecessarily to discuss them in advance. The moderate
views of Va. on the critical occasion of the al. & sed. laws, are illustrated by the terms
of the 7th Resol. with an eye to which the 3d Resol. ought always to be expounded, by
the unanimous erasure of the terms “null void” &c., from the 7th art. as it stood; and
by the condemnation & imprisonment of Callender under the law, without the
slightest opposition on the part of the state. So far was the State from countenancing
the nullifying doctrine, that the occasion was viewed as a proper one for exemplifying
its devotion to public order, and acquiescence in laws which it deemed
unconstitutional, whilst those laws were not constitutionally repealed. The language
of the Govr in a letter to a friend, will best attest the principles & feelings which
dictated the course pursued on the occasion.1

It is sometimes asked in what mode the States could interpose in their collective
character as parties to the Constitution agst usurped power. It was not necessary for
the object & reasoning of the resolns & report, that the mode should be pointed out. It
was sufficient to shew that the authy to interpose existed, and was a resort beyond that
of the Supreme Court of the U. S. or any authy derived from the Constitn. The authy.
being plenary, the mode was of its own choice, and it is obvious, that, if employed by
the States as coparties to and creators of the Constn it might either so explain the
Constn or so amend it as to provide a more satisfactory mode within the Constn itself
for guarding it agst constructive or other violations.

It remains however for the nullifying expositors to specify the right & mode of
interposition which the resolution meant to assign to the States individually. They
cannot say it was a natural right to resist intolerable oppression; for that was a right
not less admitted by all than the collective right of the States as parties to the Const.
the nondenial of which was urged as a proof that it could not be meant by the Resoln.

They cannot say that the right meant was a Constitl right to resist the constitutional
authy for that is a construction in terms, as much as a legal right to resist a law.

They can find no middle ground, between a natural and a constitutional right, on
which a right of nullifying interposition can be placed; and it is curious to observe the
awkwardness of the attempt, by the most ingenious advocates [Upshur and Berrian].

They will not rest the claim as modified by S. C. for that has scarce an advocate out of
the State, and owes the remnant of its popularity there to the disguise under which it is
now kept alive; some of the leaders of the party admitting its indefensibility, in its
naked shape.

The result is, that the nullifiers, instead of proving that the Resoln meant nullification,
would prove that it was altogether without meaning.

It appears from this Comment, that the right asserted and exercised by the Legislature,
to declare an act of Congs. unconstitutional had been denied by the Defenders of the
alien & sedition acts as an interference with the Judicial authority; and, consequently,
that the reasonings employed by the Legislature, were called for by the doctrines and
inferences drawn from that authority, and were not an idle display of what no one
denied.

It appears still farther, that the efficacious interposition contemplated by the
Legislature; was a concurring and co-operating interposition of the States, not that of
a single State.

It appears that the Legislature expressly disclaimed the idea that a declaration of a
State, that a law of the U. S. was unconstitutional, had the effect of annulling the law.

It appears that the object to be attained by the invited cooperation with Virginia was,
as expressed in the 3d. & 7th. Resol. to maintain within the several States their
respective auths. rights, & liberties, which could not be constitutionally different in
different States, nor inconsistent with a sameness in the authy. & laws of the U. S. in
all & in each.

It appears that the means contemplated by the Legislature for attaining the object,
were measures recognised & designated by the Constitution itself.1

Lastly, it may be remarked that the concurring measures of the states, without any
nullifying interposition whatever did attain the contemplated object; a triumph over
the obnoxious acts, and an apparent abandonment of them for ever.

It has been said or insinuated that the proceedings of Virgs. in 98-99, had not the
influence ascribed to them in bringing about that result. Whether the influence was or
was not such as has been claimed for them, is a question that does not affect the
meaning & intention of the proceedings. But as a question of fact, the decision may be
safely left to the recollection of those who were co-temporary with the crisis, and to
the researches of those who were not, taking for their guides the reception given to the

proceedings by the Repubn. party every where, and the pains taken by it, in
multiplying republications of them in newspapers and in other forms.

What the effect might have been if Virga. had remained patient & silent, and still
more if she had sided with S. Carolina, in favoring the alien & sedition acts. can be
but a matter of conjecture.

What would have been thought of her if she had recommended the nullifying project
of S. C. may be estimated by the reception given to it under all the factitious gloss,
and in the midst of the peculiar excitement of which advantage has been taken by the
partizans of that anomalous conceit.

It has been sufficiently shown, from the language of the Report, as has been seen, that
the right in the States to interpose declarations & protests, agst unconstitutional acts of
Congress, had been denied; and that the reasoning in the Resolutions was called for
by that denial. But the triumphant tone, with which it is affirmed & reiterated that the
resolutions, must have been directed agst what no one denied, unless they were meant
to assert the right of a single State to arrest and annul acts of the federal Legislature,
makes it proper to adduce a proof of the fact that the declaratory right was denied,
which, if it does not silence the advocate of nullification, must render every candid ear
indignant at the repetition of the untruth.

The proof is found in the recorded votes of a large and respectable portion of the
House of Delegates, at the time of passing the report.

A motion [see the Journal] offered at the closing scene affirms “that protests made by
the Legislature of this or any other State agst. particular acts of Congs. as
unconstitutional accompanied with invitations to other States, to join in such protests,
are improper & unauthorized assumptions of power not permitted, nor intended to be
permitted to the State Legislatures. And inasmuch as correspondent sentiments with
the present, have been expressed by those of our sister States who have acted on the
Resolutions [of 1798], Resolved therefore that the present General Assembly
convinced of the impropriety of the Resolutions of the last Assembly, deem it
inexpedient farther to act on the said Resolutions.”

On this Resolution, the votes, according to the yeas & nays were 57, of the former, 98
of the latter.

Here then within the H. of Delegates itself more than ? of the whole number denied
the right of the State Legislature to proceed by acts merely declaratory agst. the
constitutionality of acts of Congs and affirmed moreover that the states who had acted
on the Resols of Va. entertained the same sentiments. It is remarkable that the
minority, who denied the right of the legislatures even to protest, admitted the right of
the states in the capacity of parties, without claiming it for a single state.

With this testimony under the eye it may surely be expected that it will never again be
said that such a right had never been denied, nor the pretext again resorted to that
without such a denial, the nullifying doctrine alone could satisfy the true meaning of

the Legislature. [See the instructions to the members of Congress passed at the same
session, which do not squint at the nullifying idea; see also the protest of the minority
in the Virga. Legislare. and the Report of the Comee of Congs. on the proceedings of
Virginia.]

It has been asked whether every right has not its remedy, and what other remedy
exists under the Govt. of the U. S. agst. usurpations of power, but a right in the States
individually to annul and resist them.

The plain answer is, that the remedy is the same under the government of the United
States as under all other Govts. established & organized on free principles. The first
remedy is in the checks provided among the constituted authorities; that failing the
next is in the influence of the Ballot-boxes & Hustings; that again failing, the appeal
lies to the power that made the Constitution, and can explain, amend, or remake it.
Should this resort also fail, and the power usurped be sustained in its oppressive
exercise on a minority by a majority, the final course to be pursued by the minority,
must be a subject of calculation, in which the degree of oppression, the means of
resistance, the consequences of its failure, and consequences of its success must be
the elements.

Does not this view of the case, equally belong to every one of the States, Virginia for
example.

Should the constituted authorities of the State unite in usurping oppressive powers;
should the constituent Body fail to arrest the progress of the evil thro’ the elective
process according to the forms of the Constitution; and should the authority which is
above that of the Constitution, the majority of the people, inflexibly support the
oppression inflicted on the minority, nothing would remain for the minority, but to
rally to its reserved rights (for every citizen has his reserved rights, as exemplified in
Declarations prefixed to most of the State constitutions), and to decide between
acquiescence & resistance, according to the calculation above stated.

Those who question the analogy in this respect between the two cases, however
different they may be in some other respects, must say, as some of them, with a
boldness truly astonishing do say, that the Constitution of the U. S. which as such, and
under that name, was presented to & accepted by those who ratified it; which has been
so deemed & so called by those living under it for nearly half a century; and, as such
sworn to by every officer, state as well as federal, is yet no Constitution, but a treaty,
a league, or at most a confederacy among nations, as independent and sovereign, in
relation to each other, as before the charter which calls itself a Constitution was
formed.

The same zealots must again say, as they do, with a like boldness & incongruity that
the Govt of the U. S. wch has been so deemed & so called from its birth to the present
time; which is organized in the regular forms of Representative Govts. and like them
operates directly on the individuals represented; and whose laws are declared to be the
supreme law of the land, with a physical force in the govt for executing them, is yet

no govt. but a mere agency, a power of attorney, revocable at the will of any of the
parties granting it.

Strange as it must appear, there are some who maintain these doctrines, and hold this
language: and what is stranger still, denounce those as heretics and apostates who
adhere to the language & tenets of their fathers, and this is done with an exulting
question whether every right has not its remedy; and what remedy can be found
against federal usurpations, other than that of a right in every State to nullify & resist
the federal acts at its pleasure?

Yes, it may be safely admitted that every right has its remedy; as it must be admitted
that the remedy under the Constitution lies where it has been marked out by the
Constitution; and that no appeal can be consistently made from that remedy by those
who were and still profess to be parties to it, but the appeal to the parties themselves
having an authority above the Constitution or to the law of nature & of nature’s God.

It is painful to be obliged to notice such a sophism as that by which this inference is
assailed. Because an unconstitutional law is no law, it is alledged that it may be
constitutionally disobeyed by all who think it unconstitutional. The fallacy is so
obvious, that it can impose on none but the most biassed or heedless observers. It
makes no distinction where the distinction is obvious, and essential, between the case
of a law confessedly unconstitutional, and a case turning on a doubt & a divided
opinion as to the meaning of the Constitution; on a question, not whether the
Constitution ought or ought not to be obeyed; but on the question, what is the
Constitution. And can it be seriously & deliberately maintained, that every individual
or every subordinate authy or every party to a compact, has a right to take for granted,
that its construction is the infallible one, and to act upon it agst. the construction of all
others, having an equal right to expound the instrument, nay against the regular
exposition of the constituted authorities, with the tacit sanction of the community.
Such a doctrine must be seen at once to be subversive of all constitutions, all laws,
and all compacts. The provision made by a Constn. for its own exposition, thro’ its
own authorities & forms, must prevail whilst the Constitution is left to itself by those
who made it; or until cases arise which justify a resort to ultra-constitutional
interpositions.

The main pillar of nullification is the assumption that sovereignty is a unit, at once
indivisible and unalienable; that the states therefore individually retain it entire as they
originally held it, and, consequently that no portion of it can belong to the U. S.

But is not the Constn. itself necessarily the offspring of a sovn authy? What but the
highest pol: authy. a sovereign authy, could make such a Constn.? a constn. wch. makes
a Govt.; a Govt. which makes laws; laws which operate like the laws of all other govts.
by a penal & physical force, on the individuals subject to the laws; and finally laws
declared to be the Supreme law of the land; anything in the Constn or laws of the
individual State notwithstanding.

And where does the sovy. which makes such a Constn reside. It resides not in a single
state but in the people of each of the several states, uniting with those of the others in

the express & solemn compact which forms the Constn To the extent of that compact
or Constitution therefore, the people of the several States must be a sovereign as they
are a united people.

In like manner, the constns. of the States, made by the people as separated into States,
were made by a sovereign authy by a sovereignty residing in each of the States, to the
extent of the objects embraced by their respective constitutions. And if the states be
thus sovereign, though shorn of so many of the essential attributes of sovereignty, the
U. States by virtue of the sovereign attributes with wch they are endowed, may, to that
extent, be sovereign, tho’ destitute of the attributes of which the States are not shorn.

Such is the political system of the U. S. de jure & de facto; and however it may be
obscured by the ingenuity and technicalities of controversial commentators, its true
character will be sustained by an appeal to the law and the testimony of the
fundamental charter.

The more the pol: system of the U. S. is fairly examined, the more necessary it will be
found, to abandon the abstract and technical modes of expounding & designating its
character; and to view it as laid down in the charter which constitutes it, as a system,
hitherto without a model; as neither a simple or a consolidated Govt. nor a Govt.
altogether confederate; and therefore not to be explained so as to make it either, but to
be explained and designated, according to the actual division and distribution of
political power on the face of the instrument.

A just inference from a survey of this polit: system is that it is a division and
distribution of pol: power, nowhere else to be found; a nondescript, to be tested and
explained by itself alone; and that it happily illustrates the diversified modifications of
which the representative principle of republicanism is susceptible with a view to the
conditions, opinions, and habits of particular communities.

That a sovereignty should have even been denied to the States in their united
character, may well excite wonder, when it is recollected that the Constn which now
unites them, was announced by the convn which formed it, as dividing sovereignty
between the Union & the States; [see letter of the Presdt of the Convention (W.) to the
old Congs1 ] that it was presented under that view, by contemporary expositions
recommendg it to the ratifying authorities [see Federt and other proofs]; that it is
proved to have been so understood by the language which has been applied to it
constantly & notoriously; that this has been the doctrine & language, until a very late
date, even by those who now take the lead in making a denial of it the basis of the
novel notion of nullification. [See the Report to the Legisl. of S. Carola. in 1828.] So
familiar is sovereignty in the U. S. to the thoughts, views & opinions even of its
polemic adversaries, that Mr. Rowan, in his elaborate speech in support of the
indivisibility of sovereignty, relapsed before the conclusion of his argument into the
idea that sovereignty was partly in the Union, partly in the States. [See his speech in
the Richmond Enquirer of the —.] Other champions of the Rights of the States among
them Mr. J-n might be appealed to, as bearing testimony to the sovereignty of the U.
S. If Burr had been convicted of acts defined to be treason, wch it is allowed can be
committed only agst a sovern. authy who wd. then have pleaded the want of sovy in the

U. S. Quere. if there be no sovy. in the U. S. whether the crime denominated treason
might not be committed, without falling within the jurisdiction of the States, and
consequently, with impunity?

What seems to be an obvious & indefeasible proof that the people of the individual
States, as composing the U. States must possess a sovereignty, at least in relation to
foreign sovereigns is that in that supposition only, foreign Govts. would be willing or
expected to maintain international relations with the U. S. Let it be understood that the
Govt at Washington was not a national Govt representing a sovereign authy; and that
the sovereignty resided absolutely & exclusively in the several States, as the only
sovereigns & nations in our political system, and the diplomatic functionaries at the
seat of the Fedl Govt would be obliged to close their communications with the Secy of
State, and with new commissions repair to Columbia, in S. C. and other seats of the
State Govts. They could no longer, as the Repts of a sovereign authy hold intercourse
with a functionary who was but an agent of a self-called Govt which was itself but an
agent, representing no sovereign authority; not of the States as separate sovereignties,
nor a sovereignty in the U. S. which had no existence. For a like reason, the
Plenipotentiaries of the U. S. at foreign courts, would be obliged to return home
unless commissioned by the individual States. With respect to foreign nations, the
confederacy of the States was held de facto to be a nation, or other nations would not
have held national relations with it.

There is one view of the subject which ought to have its influence on those who
espouse doctrines which strike at the authoritative origin and efficacious operation of
the Govt of the U. States. The Govt of the U. S. like all Govts free in their principles,
rests on compact; a compact, not between the Govt & the parties who formed & live
under it; but among the parties themselves, and the strongest of Govts. are those in
which the compacts were most fairly formed and most faithfully executed.

Now all must agree that the compact in the case of the U. S. was duly formed, and by
a competent authority. It was formed, in fact by the people of the several States in
their highest sovereign authority; an authority which cd have made the compact a
mere league, or a consolidation of all entirely into one community. Such was their
authy if such had been their will. It was their will to prefer to either the constitutional
Govt now existing; and this being undeniably establd. by a competent and even the
highest human authy, it follows that the obligation to give it all the effect to which any
Govt could be entitled; whatever the mode of its formation, is equally undeniable.
Had it been formed by the people of the U. S. as one society, the authority could not
have been more competent, than that which did form it; nor wd a consolidation of the
people of the States into one people, be different in validity or operation, if made by
the aggregate authy of the people of the States, than if made by the plenary sanction
given concurrently as it was in their highest sovereign capacity. The Govt whatever it
be resulting from either of these processes would rest on an authy. equally competent;
and be equally obligatory & operative on those over whom it was established. Nor
would it be in any respect less responsible, theoretically and practically, to the
constituent body, in the one hypothesis than in the other; or less subject in extreme
cases to be resisted and overthrown. The faith pledged in the compact, being the vital
principle of all free Govt that is the true test by which pol: right & wrong are to be

decided, and the resort to physical force justified, whether applied to the enforcement
or the subversion of political power.

Whatever be the mode in which the essential auty estabd. the Constn, the structure of
this, the power of this, the rules of exposition, the means of execution, must be the
same; the tendency to consol. or dissolution the same. The question, whether we the
people means the people in their aggregate capacity, acting by a numerical majy of the
whole, or by a majy in each of all the States, the authy being equally valid and
binding, the question is interesting, but as an historical fact of merely speculative
curiosity.

Whether the centripetal or centrifugal tendency be greatest, is a problem which
experience is to decide; but it depends not on the mode of the grant, but the extent and
effect of the powers granted. The only distinctive circumstance is in the effect of a
dissolution of the system on the resultum of the parties, which, in the case of a system
formed by the people, as that of the United States was, would replace the states in the
character of separate communities, whereas a system founded by the people, as one
community, would, on its dissolution, throw the people into a state of nature.1

In conclusion, those who deny the possibility of a political system, with a divided
sovereignty like that of the U. S., must chuse between a government purely
consolidated, & an association of Govts. purely federal. All republics of the former
character, ancient or modern, have been found ineffectual for order and justice within,
and for security without. They have been either a prey to internal convulsions or to
foreign invasions. In like manner, all confederacies, ancient or modern, have been
either dissolved by the inadequacy of their cohesion, or, as in the modern examples,
continue to be monuments of the frailties of such forms. Instructed by these monitory
lessons, and by the failure of an experiment of their own (an experiment wch, while it
proved the frailty of mere federalism, proved also the frailties of republicanism
without the control of a Federal organization),1 the U. S. have adopted a modification
of political power, which aims at such a distribution of it as might avoid as well the
evils of consolidation as the defects of federation, and obtain the advantages of both.
Thus far, throughout a period of nearly half a century, the new and compound system
has been successful beyond any of the forms of Govt, ancient or modern, with which
it may be compared; having as yet discovered no defects which do not admit remedies
compatible with its vital principles and characteristic features. It becomes all therefore
who are friends of a Govt based on free principles to reflect, that by denying the
possibility of a system partly federal and partly consolidated, and who would convert
ours into one either wholly federal or wholly consolidated, in neither of which forms
have individual rights, public order, and external safety, been all duly maintained,
they aim a deadly blow at the last hope of true liberty on the face of the Earth Its
enlightened votaries must perceive the necessity of such a modification of power as
will not only divide it between the whole & the parts, but provide for occurring
questions as well between the whole & the parts as between the parts themselves. A
political system which does not contain an effective provision for a peaceable
decision of all controversies arising within itself, would be a Govt in name only. Such
a provision is obviously essential; and it is equally obvious that it cannot be either
peaceable or effective by making every part an authoritative umpire. The final appeal

in such cases must be to the authority of the whole, not to that of the parts separately
and independently. This was the view taken of the subject, whilst the Constitution was
under the consideration of the people. [See Federalist No. 39.] It was this view of it
which dictated the clause declaring that the Constitution & laws of the U. S. should be
the supreme law of the Land, anything in the constn or laws of any of the States to the
contrary notwithstanding. [See Art. VI.] It was the same view which specially
prohibited certain powers and acts to the States, among them any laws violating the
obligation of contracts, and which dictated the appellate provision in the Judicial act
passed by the first Congress under the Constitution. [See Art. I.] And it may be
confidently foretold, that notwithstanding the clouds which a patriotic jealousy or
other causes have at times thrown over the subject, it is the view which will be
permanently taken of it, with a surprise hereafter, that any other should ever have
been contended for.

TO — —.

March, 1836.        Mad. Mss.

DR Sir,—

The letter of Mr. Leigh to the Genl. Assembly presents some interesting views of its
important subject & furnishes an excuse for reflections not inapposite to the present
juncture.

The precise obligation imposed on a representative, by the instructions of his
constituents, still divides the opinions, of distinguished statesmen. This is the case in
Great Britain, where such topics have been most discussed. It is also now the case,
more or less, and was so, at the first Congress under the present Constitution, as
appears from the Register of Debates, imperfectly as they were reported.

It being agreed by all, that whether an instruction be obeyed or disobeyed, the act of
the Representative is equally valid & operative, the question is a moral one, between
the Representative, and his Constituents. With him, if satisfied, that the instruction
expresses the will of his constituents, it must be to decide whether he will conform to
an instruction opposed to his judgment or will incur their displeasure by disobeying it
and with them to decide in what mode they will manifest their displeasure. In a case
necessarily appealing to the conscience of the Representative its paramount dictates
must of course be his guide.

It is well known that the equality of the States in the Federal Senate was a
compromise between the larger, & the smaller states, the former claiming a
proportional representation in both branches of the Legislature, as due to their
superior population; the latter, an equality in both, as a safeguard to the reserved
sovereignty of the States, an object which obtained the concurrence of members from
the larger States. But it is equally true tho’ but little adverted to as an instance of
miscalculating speculation that, as soon as the smaller States, had secured more than a
proportional share in the proposed Government, they became favorable to

augmentations of its powers; & that under the administration of the Govt., they have
generally, in contests between it, & the State governments, leaned to the former.
Whether the direct effect of instructions which could make the senators dependent on
the pleasure of their Constituents, or the indirect effect inferred from such a tenure by
Mr. Leigh, would be most favourable, to the General Government, or the state
Governments, is a question which not being tested by practice, is left to individual
opinions. My anticipations I confess do not accord with that in the letter.

Nothing is more certain than that the tenure of the Senate, was meant as an obstacle to
the instability, which not only history, but the experience of our Country, had shewn
to be the besetting infirmity of popular Govts. Innovations therefore impairing the
stability afforded by that tenure, without some compensating remodification of the
powers of the Government, must affect the balance, contemplated by the Constitution.

My prolonged life has made me a witness of the alternate popularity, & unpopularity
of each of the great branches of the Federal Government. I have witnessed, also, the
vicissitudes, in the apparent tendencies in the Federal & State Governments to
encroach each on the authorities of the other, without being able to infer with
certainty, what would be the final operation of the causes as heretofore existing;
whilst it is far more difficult, to calculate, the mingled & checkered influences, on the
future from an expanding territorial Domain; from the multiplication of the parties to
the Union, from the great & growing power of not a few of them, from the absence of
external danger; from combinations of States in some quarters, and collisions in
others, and from questions, incident to a refusal of unsuccessful parties to abide by the
issue of controversies judicially decided. To these uncertainties, may be added, the
effects of a dense population, & the multiplication, and the varying relations of the
classes composing it. I am far however from desponding of the great political
experiment in the hands of the American people. Much has already been gained in its
favour, by the continued prosperity accompanying it through a period of so many
years. Much may be expected from the progress and diffusion of political science in
dissipating errors, opposed to the sound principles which harmonize different
interests; from the Geographical, commercial, & social ligaments, strengthened as
they are by mechanical improvements, giving so much advantage to time over space;
& above all, by the obvious & inevitable consequences of the wreck of an ark, bearing
as we have flattered ourselves the happiness of our country & the hope of the world.
Nor is it unworthy of consideration, that the 4 great religious Sects, running through
all the States, will oppose an event placing parts of each under separate Governments.

It cannot be denied that there are in the aspect our country presents, Phenomena of an
ill omen, but it wd. seem that they proceed from a coincidence of causes, some
transitory, others fortuitous, rarely if ever likely to recur, that of the causes more
durable some can be greatly mitigated if not removed by the Legislative authority, and
such as may require and be worthy the “intersit” of a higher power, can be provided
for whenever, if ever, the public mind may be calm and cool enough for that resort.

FACSIMILE OF JAMES MADISON’S LAST MESSAGE TO HIS COUNTRYMEN
IN MRS. MADISON’S WRITING

[1 ]See ante, Vol. IV., pp. 264, 327, 414.

[2 ]The debates of the Pennsylvania Convention contain a speech of Mr. Willson, (*)
(Decr 3, 1787) who had been a member of the general convention, in which, alluding
to the clause tolerating for a time, the farther importation of slaves, he consoles
himself with the hope that, in a few years it would be prohibited altogether; observing
that in the mean time, the new States which were to be formed would be under the
controul of Congress in this particular, and slaves would never be introduced among
them. In another speech on the day following and alluding to the same clause, his
words are “yet the lapse of a few years & Congress will have power to exterminate
slavery within our borders.” How far the language of Mr. W. may have been
accurately reported is not known. The expressions used, are more vague & less
consistent than would be readily ascribed to him. But as they stand, the fairest
construction would be, that he considered the power given to Congress, to arrest the
importation of slaves as “laying a foundation for banishing slavery out of the country;
& tho’ at a period more distant than might be wished, producing the same kind of
gradual change which was pursued in Pennsylvania.” (See his speech, page 90 of the
Debates.) By this “change,” after the example of Pennsylvania, he must have meant a
change by the other States influenced by that example, & yielding to the general way
of thinking & feeling, produced by the policy of putting an end to the importation of
slaves. He could not mean by “banishing slavery,” more than by a power “to
exterminate it,” that Congress were authorized to do what is literally
expressed.—Madison’s Note.

In the letter Madison said.

“It is far from my purpose to resume a subject on which I have perhaps already
exceeded the proper limits. But, having spoken with so confident a recollection of the
meaning attached by the Convention to the term “migration” which seems to be an
important hinge to the Argument, I may be permitted merely to remark that Mr.
Wilson, with the proceedings of that assembly fresh on his mind, distinctly applies the
term to persons coming to the U. S. from abroad, (see his printed speech, p. 59) and

that a consistency of the passage cited from the Federalist with my recollections, is
preserved by the discriminating term “beneficial” added to voluntary emigrations
from Europe to America.”—Mad. MSS. Wilson’s speech may be found in Elliott’s
Debates, ii., 451.

[1 ]In the convention of Virga the opposition to the Constitution comprised a number
of the ablest men in the State. Among them were Mr. Henry & Col. Mason, both of
them distinguished by their acuteness, and anxious to display unpopular constructions.
One of them Col. Mason, had been a member of the general convention and entered
freely into accounts of what passed within it. Yet neither of them, nor indeed any of
the other opponents, among the multitude of their objections, and farfetched
interpretations, ever hinted, in the debates on the 9th Sect. of Ar. 1, at a power given
by it to prohibit an interior migration of any sort. The meaning of the Secn. as levelled
against migrations or importations from abroad, was not contested.—Madison’s Note.

[1 ]Article VII of the treaty of cession (1803) provided that “French ships coming
directly from France or any of her colonies, loaded only with the produce and
manufactures of France or her said colonies, and the ships of Spain coming directly
from Spain or any of her colonies, loaded only with the produce or manufactures of
Spain or her colonies, shall be admitted during the space of twelve years in the port of
New Orleans, and in all other legal ports of entry within the ceded territory, in the
same manner as the ships of the United States coming directly from France or Spain
or any of their colonies, without being subject to any other or greater duty on
merchandise, or other or greater tonnage than that paid by the citizens of the United
States.”—Treaties and Conventions, 333.

[1 ]Appeal from the Judgment of Great Britain respecting the United States. (1819.)

[2 ]Hertell sent Madison his pamphlet entitled “An Exposè of the causes of
intemperate drinking and the means by which it may be obviated.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]November 29 Crolius transmitted an address of the Tammany Society on the
subject of national economy and domestic manufactures.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]See ante, Vol. VII., p. 162. Peletiah Webster’s pamphlet was: A Dissertation on
the Political Union and Constitution of the Thirteen United States of North America:
which is necessary to their Preservation and Happiness, humbly offered to the Public,
by a Citizen of Philadelphia. Philadelphia: 1783. It was reprinted in 1908, as Pub.
Doc. 461, 60th Cong., 1st Sess. (Senate.)

Apparently, Madison was unsuccessful in obtaining the pamphlet from Noah Webster
for he wrote to Tench Coxe November 10, 1820:

In looking over my pamphlets & other printed papers, I perceive a chasm in the
Debates of Congress between March 4, 1790 (being the close of No III of Vol IV, by
T. Lloyd) & the removal of Congress from Philadelphia to Washington. May I ask the
favor of you, if it can be done without difficulty, to procure for me the means of
filling the chasm. I should be glad also to procure a pamphlet, “Sketches of American

policy by Noah Webster,” published in Philadelphia in 1784 or ’5; and another,
“Pelitiah Webster’s dissertation on the political Union & Constitution of the thirteen
U. States,” published in 1783 or ’4. Both of them have disappeared from my
collection of such things.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The Journal, Acts and Proceedings of the Convention, etc., Boston, 1819,
published by authority of joint resolution of Congress of March 27, 1818. Ante, III., p.
xiv.

[1 ]The Missouri Act was approved March 6, 1820. Section 8 read: “That in all that
territory ceded by France to the United States, under the name of Louisiana, which
lies north of thirty-six degrees and thirty minutes north latitude, not included within
the limits of the State contemplated by this act, slavery and involuntary servitude,
otherwise than in punishment of crimes . . . shall be and is hereby forever
prohibited.”—3 Stat., 548.

[1 ]Williams submitted a pamphlet on the causes of the commercial depression and a
plan for reforming the currency.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]From the original kindly loaned by Fredk. D. McGuire, Esq., of Washington.

[1 ]See ante, Vol. IV., p. 396.

[1 ]John W. Taylor, of New York, was elected speaker. The debate on the question of
the admission of Missouri began November 23d.—Annals of Congress, 16th Cong.,
2d Sess., p. 453.

[1 ]Coxe was not appointed. He died in 1824 aged seventy years.

[1 ]The letter is dated November 25, 1780.—Ante, Vol. I., p. 101.

[1 ]From Madison’s Works (Cong. Ed.). Corbin’s letter said that slavery and farming
were incompatible and that he was thinking of emigrating to the North.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]William Eustis was elected to Congress from Massachusetts in 1820 and served
till 1823, when he was elected Governor of Massachusetts, holding the office until his
death in 1825.

[1 ]The act of May 15, 1820, “to limit the term of office of certain officers,” provided
that district attorneys, collectors of customs, naval officers, surveyors of customs,
navy agents, receivers of public moneys for lands, registers of the land offices,
paymasters in the army, the apothecary general, the assistant apothecaries general and
the commissary general of purchases should be appointed for a term of four years, but
should be removable at pleasure.

On this subject Madison wrote to Jefferson, January 7, 1821:

In the late views taken by us, of the Act of Congress, vacating periodically the
Executive offices, it was not recollected, in justice to the President, that the measure

was not without precedents. I suspect however that these are confined to the
Territorial establishments, where they were introduced by the Old Congs. in whom all
powers of Govt. were confounded; and continued by the new Congress, who have
exercised a like confusion of powers within the same limits. Whether the
Congressional code contains any precedent of a like sort more particularly misleading
the President I have not fully examined. If it does, it must have blindly followed the
territorial examples.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]See letter to Jefferson June 19, 1786, ante, Vol. II., p. 246. The work under
discussion was William Godwin’s Of Population; an Enquiry Concerning the Power
of Increase in the Numbers of Mankind, being an Answer to Mr. Malthus’s Essay on
the Subject. London, 1820.

[1 ]See for exact no. Senator Smiths speech of last session.—Madison’s Note.

[1 ]The case referred to is Cohens v. Virginia. Chief Justice Marshall handed down
the decision, which is highly federal in tone.—6 Wheaton, 257.

Roane wrote five articles under the nom de plume Algernon Sydney, against the
position of the Supreme Court. They were published in the Richmond Enquirer
beginning May 25, 1821.

[1 ]“The opinion of the Federalist has always been considered as of great authority. It
is a complete commentary on our constitution, and is appealed to by all parties in the
questions to which that instrument has given birth. Its intrinsic merit entitles it to this
high rank; and the part two of its authors performed in framing the constitution, put it
very much in their power to explain the views with which it was framed.”—6
Wheaton, 294.

[1 ]Commercial Advertiser, Aug. 18, 1821.—Madison’s note.

[2 ]Gales sent the clipping with the remark: “If the whole work be of the same texture,
it must be of little value, less authority.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Madison’s note says: “See letter of 15th September, 1821, to Thomas Ritchie.” It
is as follows:

(Confidential)

Dear Sir,—

I have recd. yours of the 8th instant on the subject of the proceedings of the
Convention of 1787.

It is true as the Public has been led to understand, that I possess materials for a pretty
ample view of what passed in that Assembly. It is true also that it has not been my
intention that they should forever remain under the veil of secrecy. Of the time when

it might be not improper for them to see the light, I had formed no particular
determination. In general it had appeared to me that it might be best to let the work be
a posthumous one, or at least that its publication should be delayed till the
Constitution should be well settled by practice, & till a knowledge of the controversial
part of the proceedings of its framers could be turned to no improper account.
Delicacy also seemed to require some respect to the rule by which the Convention
“prohibited a promulgation without leave of what was spoken in it,” so long as the
policy of that rule could be regarded as in any degree unexpired. As a guide in
expounding and applying the provisions of the Constitution, the debates and
incidental decisions of the Convention can have no authoritative character. However
desirable it be that they should be preserved as a gratification to the laudable curiosity
felt by every people to trace the origin and progress of their political Institutions, & as
a source perhaps of some lights on the Science of Govt. the legitimate meaning of the
Instrument must be derived from the text itself; or if a key is to be sought elsewhere, it
must be not in the opinions or intentions of the Body which planned & proposed the
Constitution, but in the sense attached to it by the people in their respective State
Conventions where it recd. all the Authority which it possesses.

Such being the course of my reflections I have suffered a concurrence & continuance
of particular inconveniences for the time past, to prevent me from giving to my notes
the fair & full preparation due to the subject of them. Of late, being aware of the
growing hazards of postponement, I have taken the incipient steps for executing the
task; and the expediency of not risking an ultimate failure is suggested by the Albany
Publication, from the notes of a N York member of the Convention. I have not seen
more of the volume than has been extracted into the Newspapers. But it may be
inferred from these samples, that it is not only a very mutilated but a very erroneous
edition of the matter to which it relates. There must be an entire omission also of the
proceedings of the latter period of the session from which Mr. Yates & Mr. Lansing
withdrew in the temper manifested by their report to their constituents; the period
during which the variant & variable opinions, converged & centered in the
modifications seen in the final act of the Body.

It is my purpose now to devote a portion of my time to an exact digest of the
voluminous materials in my hands. How long a time it will require, under the
interruptions & avocations which are probable, I cannot easily conjecture; not a little
will be necessary for the mere labour of making fair transcripts. By the time I get the
whole into a due form for preservation, I shall be better able to decide on the question
of publication. As to the particular place or Press, shd this be the result, I have not as
must be presumed, turned a thought to either. Nor can I say more now than that your
letter will be kept in recollection, & that should any other arrangement prevail over its
object, it will not proceed from any want of confidence esteem or friendly
dispositions; of all which I tender you sincere assurances.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]To Lafayette Madison wrote the same year (date not given).

“The Negro slavery is as you justly complain a sad blot on our free Country tho. a
very ungracious subject of reproaches from the quarter wch. has been most lavish of
them. No satisfactory plan has yet been devised for taking out the stain. If an adequate

asylum cd be found in Africa that wd be the appropriate destination for the unhappy
race among us. Some are sanguine that the efforts of an existing Colonization Society
will accomplish such a provision, but a very partial success seems the most that can
be expected. Some other region must therefore be found for them as they become free
and willing to emigrate. The repugnance of the Whites to their continuance among
them is founded on prejudices themselves founded on physical distinctions, which are
not likely soon if ever to be eradicated. Even in States, Massachusetts for example,
which displayed most sympathy with the people of colour on the Missouri question,
prohibitions are taking place agst their becoming residents. They are every where
regarded as a nuisance, and must really be such as long as they are under the
degradation which the public sentiment inflicts on them. They are at the same time
rapidly increasing from manumissions and from offsprings, and of course lessening
the general disproportion between the slaves & the Whites. This tendency is favorable
to the cause of a universal emancipation.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The letter with the annexed copies of supporting letters was printed in Niles’
Weekly Register, January 26, 1822, Vol. xxi., p. 347. For the letter of November 25,
1780, to Joseph Jones, see ante I., 101; for that of December 5, 1780, to Jones, Id.,
110; for the joint letter of Thedorick Bland and Madison to Jefferson, December 13,
1780, Id., 102, n.

[1 ]Drawn by J. M.—Madison’s note.

[1 ]The Florida treaty was proclaimed February 22, 1821; Monroe’s message
recommending recognition of South American independence was dated March 8,
1822.

[1 ]Madison made the following memorandum on the subject (undated):

Power Of The President To Appoint Public Ministers &
Consuls In The Recess Of The Senate.

The place of a foreign Minister or Consul is not an office in the constitutional sense of
the term.

1. It is not created by the Constitution.

2. It is not created by a law authorized by the Constitution.

3. It cannot, as an office, be created by the mere appointment for it, made by the
President & Senate, who are to fill, not create offices. These must be “established by
law,” & therefore by Congress only.

4. On the supposition even that the appointment could create an office, the office
would expire with the expiration of the appointment, and every new appointment

would create a new office, not fill an old one. A law reviving an expired law is a new
law.

The place of a foreign Minister or Consul is to be viewed, as created by the Law of
Nations to which the U. S. as an Independent nation, is a party; and as always open
for the proper functionaries, when sent by the constituted authority of one nation, and
received by that of another. The Constitution in providing for the appointment of such
functionaries, presupposes this mode of intercourse as a branch of the Law of Nations.

The question to be decided is, What are the cases in which the President can make
appointments without the concurrence of the Senate; and it turns on the construction
of the power “to fill up all vacancies which may happen during the recess of the
Senate.”

The term all embraces both foreign and municipal cases; and in examining the power
in the foreign, however failing in exact analogy to the municipal, it is not improper to
notice the extent of the power in the municipal.

If the text of the Constitution be taken literally no municipal officer could be
appointed by the President alone, to a vacancy not originating in the recess of the
Senate. It appears however, that under the sanction of the maxim, qui hæret in litera
hæret in cortice, and of the argumentum ab inconvenienti, the power has been
understood to extend, in cases of necessity or urgency, to vacancies happening to
exist, in the recess of the Senate, though not coming into existence in the recess. In
the case, for example, of an appointment to a vacancy by the President & Senate, of a
person dead at the time, but not known to be so, till after the adjournment and
dispersion of the Senate, it has been deemed within the reason of the constitutional
provision, that the vacancy should be filled by the President alone; the object of the
provision being to prevent a failure in the execution of the laws, which without such a
scope to the power, must very inconveniently happen, more especially in so extensive
a country. Other cases of like urgency may occur; such as an appointment by the
President & Senate rendered abortive by a refusal to accept it.

If it be admissible at all to make the power of the President without the Senate,
applicable to vacancies happening unavoidably to exist, tho’ not to originate, in the
recess of the Senate, and which the public good requires to be filled in the recess, the
reasons are far more cogent for considering the sole power of the President as
applicable to the appointment of foreign functionaries; inasmuch as the occasions
demanding such appointments may not only be far more important, but on the further
consideration, that unlike appointments under the municipal law, the calls for them
may depend on circumstances altogether under foreign controul, and sometimes on
the most improbable & sudden emergencies, and requiring therefore that a competent
authority to meet them should be always in existence. It would be a hard imputation
on the Framers and Ratifiers of the Constitution, that while providing for casualties of
inferior magnitude, they should have intended to exclude from the provision, the
means usually employed in obviating a threatened war; in putting an end to its
calamities; in conciliating the friendship or neutrality of powerful nations, or even in
seizing a favourable moment for commercial or other arrangements material to the

public interest. And it would surely be a hard rule of construction, that would give to
the text of the Constitution an operation so injurious, in preference to a construction
that would avoid it, and not be more liberal than would be applied to a remedial
statute. Nor ought the remark to be omitted that by rejecting such a construction this
important function unlike some others, would be excluded altogether from our
political system, there being no pretension to it in any other department of the General
Government, or in any department of the State Govts. To regard the power of
appointing the highest Functionaries employed in foreign missions, tho’ a specific &
substantive provision in the Constitution, as incidental merely, in any case, to a
subordinate power, that of a provisional negotiation by the President alone, would be
a more strained construction of the text than that here given to it.

The view which has been taken of the subject overrules the distinction between
missions to foreign Courts, to which there had before been appointments, and to
which there had not been. Not to speak of diplomatic appointments destined not for
stations at foreign courts, but for special negotiations, no matter where, and to which
the distinction would be inapplicable, it cannot bear a rational or practical test in the
cases to which it has been applied. An appointment to a foreign court, at one time,
unlike an appointment to a municipal office always requiring it, is no evidence of a
need for the appointment at another time; whilst an appointment where there had been
none before, may, in the recess of the Senate, be of the greatest urgency. The
distinction becomes almost ludicrous when it is asked for what length of time the
circumstance of a former appointment is to have the effect assigned to it on the power
of the President. Can it be seriously alleged, that after the interval of a century, & the
political changes incident to such a lapse of time, the original appointment is to
authorize a new one, without the concurrence of the Senate; whilst a like appointment
to a new court, or even a new nation however immediately called for, is barred by the
circumstance that no previous appointment to it had taken place. The case of
diplomatic missions belongs to the Law of Nations, and the principles & usages on
which that is founded are entitled to a certain influence in expounding the provisions
of the Constitution which have relation to such missions. The distinction between
courts to which there had, and to which there had not been previous missions, is
believed to be recorded in none of the oracular works on international law, and to be
unknown to the practice of Governments, where no question was involved as to the de
facto establishment of a Government.

With this exposition, the practice of the Government of the U. States has
corresponded, and with every sanction of reason & public expediency. If in any
particular instance the power has been misused, which it is not meant to suggest, that
could not invalidate either its legitimacy or its general utility, any more than any other
power would be invalidated by a like fault in the use of it.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]This letter was shown to John Quincy Adams by Monroe and the part relating to
appointments was read to the Cabinet.—Adams’s Diary, v., 539; vi., 25.

[1 ]Adams, Secretary of State, Crawford, Secretary of the Treasury, and Calhoun,
Secretary of War, were candidates for the nomination to succeed Monroe and at
enmity with each other.

[1 ]Livingston’s famous Report of the Plan of the Penal Code had just been published
in New Orleans.

[1 ]The report was made by Mr. Jefferson, Mr. Pendleton, and Mr.
Wythe.—Madison’s Note.

[1 ]The attempt to give credit to Richard Henry Lee for part authorship of the
Declaration of Independence appeared in the Philadelphia Union and Federal
Republican, reprinted in the Charleston Patriot, and all copied in the Richmond
Enquirer, August 6, 1822.

[2 ]See the Journal of that date (Madison’s Note).

[1 ]On February 14, 1815, James T. Austin applied to Madison for the appointment of
Comptroller of the Treasury.—Mad. MSS. Austin’s Life of Elbridge Gerry appeared
in 1828-’29. January 22, 1832, he wrote to Madison for information concerning
Gerry’s services in the Constitutional Convention for use in a revised edition of his
book, which, however, never was published. Elbridge Gerry, Jr., wrote to Madison
December 4, 1814, saying his father had impoverished himself and his family by his
public services, and asked for an office.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]See Jefferson’s letter in Writings (P. L. Ford), xii., p. 274. Judge William Johnson
wrote to Jefferson Dec. 10, 1822, from Charleston. “When I was on our State bench I
was accustomed to delivering seriatim opinions in our appellate Court, and was not a
little surprised to find our Chief-Justice in the Supreme Court delivering all the
opinions in cases in which he sat, even in some Instances when contrary to his own
Judgment & vote. But I remonstrated in vain; the answer was, he is willing to take the
Trouble, & it is a Mark of Respect to him. I soon, however, found out the real cause.
Cushing was incompetent, Chase could not be got to think or write, Patterson was a
slow man & willingly declined the Trouble, & the other two Judges [Marshall and
Bushrod Washington] you know are commonly estimated as one Judge.” He had
succeeded in getting the court to appoint some one to deliver the opinion of the
majority and leave it to the minority’s discretion to record its opinion or not. The real
trouble was that the court was too numerous. “Among seven men,” he said, “you will
always find at least one intriguer, and probably more than one who may be acted upon
only by intrigue.” Four judges were enough. He would have the country divided into a
Southern, a Western, a Middle, and an Eastern division and a judge appointed from
each.—Jefferson MSS.

[1 ]The Life and Correspondence of Nathaniel Greene, Charleston, 1822.

[2 ]Alexander Hill Everett’s Europe: or a General Survey of the Present Situation of
the Principal Powers; with Conjectures on their future Prospects. By a Citizen of the
United States. Boston, 1822.

[1 ]Ante, Vol. VII., p. 204.

[1 ]Christopher Gore printed a reply to Everett’s Europe in Remarks on the Censures
of the Government of the United States contained in the Ninth Chapter of “Europe,”
etc. Boston, 1822.

[1 ]Jedediah Morse wrote to Madison from New Haven March 14, 1823, sending a
printed list of questions “from a respectable Correspondent in Liverpool, deeply
engaged in the Abolition of the Slave Trade, and the Amelioration of the condition of
Slaves,” and asking Madison to furnish brief answers. The questions follow:

1. Do the planters generally live on their own estates?

2. Does a planter with ten or fifteen slaves employ an overlooker, or does he overlook
his slaves himself?

3. Obtain estimates of the culture of Sugar and Cotton, to show what difference it
makes where the planter resides on his estate, or where he employs attorneys,
overlookers, &c.

4. Is it a common or general practice to mortgage slave estates?

5. Are sales of slave estates very frequent under execution for debt, and what
proportion of the whole may be thus sold annually?

6. Does the Planter possess the power of selling the different branches of a family
separate?

7. When the prices of produce, Cotton, Sugar, &c., are high, do the Planters purchase,
instead of raising, their corn and other provisions?

8. When the prices of produce are low, do they then raise their own corn and other
provisions?

9. Do the negroes fare better when the Corn, &c., is raised upon their master’s estate,
or when he buys it?

10. Do the tobacco planters in America ever buy their own Corn or other food, or do
they always raise it?

11. If they always, or mostly, raise it, can any other reason be given for the difference
of the system pursued by them and that pursued by the Sugar and Cotton planters than
that the cultivation of tobacco is less profitable than that of Cotton or Sugar?

12. Do any of the Planters manufacture the packages for their produce, or the clothing
for their negroes? and if they do, are their negroes better clothed than when clothing is
purchased?

13. Where, and by whom, is the Cotton bagging of the Brazils made? is it principally
made by free men or slaves?

14. Is it the general system to employ the negroes in task work, or by the day?

15. How many hours are they generally at work in the former case? how many in the
latter? Which system is generally preferred by the master? which by the slaves?

16. Is it common to allow them a certain portion of time instead of their allowance of
provisions? In this case, how much is allowed? Where the slaves have the option,
which do they generally choose? On which system do the slaves look the best, and
acquire the most comforts?

17. Are there many small plantations where the owners possess only a few slaves?
What proportion of the whole may be supposed to be held in this way?

18. In such cases, are the slaves treated or almost considered a part of the family?

19. Do the slaves fare the best when their situations and that of the master are brought
nearest together?

20. In what state are the slaves as to religion or religious instruction?

21. Is it common for the slaves to be regularly married?

22. If a man forms an attachment to a woman on a different or distant plantation, is it
the general practice for some accommodation to take place between the owners of the
man and woman, so that they may live together?

23. In the United States of America, the slaves are found to increase at about the rate
of 3 [Editor: illegible symbol] cent. [Editor: illegible symbol] annum. Does the same
take place in other places? Give a census, if such is taken. Show what cause
contributes to this increase or what prevents it where it does not take place.

24. Obtain a variety of estimates from the Planters of the cost of bringing up a child,
and at what age it becomes a clear gain to its owner.

25. Obtain information respecting the comparative cheapness of cultivation by slaves
or by free men.

26. Is it common for the free blacks to labour in the field?

27. Where the labourers consist of free blacks and of white men, what are the relative
prices of their labour when employed about the same work?

28. What is the proportion of free blacks and slaves?

29. Is it considered that the increase in the proportion of free blacks to slaves
increases or diminishes the danger of insurrection?

30. Are the free blacks employed in the defence of the Country, and do they and the
Creoles preclude the necessity of European troops?

31. Do the free blacks appear to consider themselves as more closely connected with
the slaves or with the white population? and in cases of insurrection, with which have
they generally taken part?

32. What is their general character with respect to industry and order, as compared
with that of the slaves?

33. Are there any instances of emancipation in particular estates, and what is the
result?

34. Is there any general plan of emancipation in progress, and what?

35. What was the mode and progress of emancipation in those States in America
where slavery has ceased to exist?—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Eustis had just been elected governor of Massachusetts.

[1 ]See Jefferson to William Johnson, Oct. 27, 1822, and June 12, 1823.—Jefferson’s
Writings (P. L. Ford), xii., 246, 252, n.

[2 ]See ante, VI., No. 106, n.; also Writings of Washington (W. C. Ford), xii., 123;
xiii., 194, 277.

[1 ]Construction Construed, by John Taylor, of Caroline. Richmond 1820.

[1 ]Ante, pp. 25, 65.

[1 ]On February 5, 1824, Madison wrote to Monroe again saying he wished
information obtained from Jackson to show what was the form and date of the
appointment of Major General accepted by him in his letter of June 20, 1814, to the
Secretary of War, and when the appointment was to take effect. The reason for his
questions is explained in his statement prepared in 1824 (but never printed) entitled:
“Review of a statement attributed to Genl. John Armstrong, with an appendix of
illustrative documents.” The review said that in the Literary and Scientific Repository,
October, 1821, a statement appeared stating that early in May, 1814, Armstrong had
proposed that Jackson be appointed a Brigadier with the brevet rank of Major
General, until a vacancy should permit his appointment as Major General, and that
Madison had approved the arrangement. A communication was, accordingly, made to
Jackson, but when Harrison’s resignation was received and reported to Madison he
was undecided. Armstrong, however, acted on the President’s first approval and sent a
commission to Jackson. The letters gathered by Madison showed that on May 14,
1814, Armstrong had proposed that Jackson be made a Brigadier with the brevet of
Major General; that the President ordered Armstrong on May 17 to send a
commission for that rank; that on May 20 Armstrong reported Harrison’s resignation
without any suggestion concerning Jackson; that on May 24 the President wrote

Armstrong that Harrison’s resignation opened the way for a Major General’s
commission for Jackson, but he would suspend a final decision. In the meantime he
returned the commission of Brevet Major General because he had not received the
preliminary one of Brigadier. On May 22 Armstrong wrote to Jackson that
commissions would be prepared appointing him Brigadier and Brevet Major General.
On June 8 Jackson replied accepting this appointment. On May 28 Armstrong
informed Jackson of his appointment as Major General to succeed Harrison. It was
evident, according to Madison, that Armstrong was endeavoring to convey the false
impression that he, and not Madison, really made the appointment. Madison’s
statement proceeds.

“Should it be asked why the individual in question [Armstrong] was placed, and, after
such developments in his career, continued, at the head of the War Department, the
answer will readily occur to those best acquainted with the circumstances of the
period. Others may be referred for an explanation to the difficulty which had been felt
in its fullest pressure, of obtaining services which would have been preferred, several
eminent citizens to whom the station had been offered having successively declined it.
It was not unknown at the time that objections existed to the person finally appointed,
as appeared when his nomination went to the Senate, where it received the reluctant
sanction of a scanty majority. Nor was the President unaware or unwarned of the
temper and turn of mind ascribed to him, which might be uncongenial with the
official relations in which he was to stand. But these considerations were sacrificed to
recommendations from esteemed friends, a belief that he possessed, with known
talents, a degree of military information which might be useful, and a hope that a
proper mixture of conciliating confidence and interposing controul, would render
objectionable peculiarities less in practice than in prospect. And as far as
disappointments were experienced, it was thought better, to bear with them, than to
incur, anew, the difficulty of finding a successor, with the inconveniences of an
interval and a forced change in the head of the department of War, in the midst of
war. This view of the subject continued to prevail, till the departure of the Secretary
took place.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]On January 3, 1824, Madison wrote to George McDuffie who had introduced a
joint resolution in Congress December 22 (Annals of Cong., 18 Cong., 1st Sess., Vol.
I, p. 851) for amending the provision of the Constitution relative to the election of
President and Vice-President:

“I agree equally with them in preferring an eventual choice of Presidt. & V. Presidt.
by a joint ballot of the two Houses of Congress, to the existing provision for such a
choice by the H. of Reps. voting by States. The Committee appear to me to be very
right also in linking the amendments together, as a compromise between States who
may mutually regard them as concessions.

“In the amendment relating to District elections of representatives it is provided that
the Districts shall not be alterable previous to another Census, and the ‘Joint
Resolution’ extends the prohibition to the Electoral Districts. As the return of a
Census may not be within less than ten years, the regulation may become very
inconvenient & dissatisfactory especially in new States, within different parts of

which the population will increase at such unequal rates. It would be a better
provision that no change of Districts should take place within a period of preceding
elections next in view, and to apply the rule to cases where Congress may have a right
to interfere, as well as to the ordinary exercise of the power by the States.

“The power given by the ‘Joint Resolution’ to the Electors of P. & V. P. to fill up
their own vacancies, & to appoint the two additional Electors, is liable to the Remark,
that where there may be but a single Elector, casualities to him might deprive his State
of its two additional Electors; and that a single Elector with a right to appoint two
others, would have in effect three votes; a situation exposing him in a particular
manner, to temptations of which the Constitution is jealous. The objection to such an
augmented power applies, generally, with a force proportioned to the powers of
Electors allotted to a State. There may be some difficulty in finding a satisfactory
remedy for the case. In States entitled to but one Representative, the single district
might choose the three Electors. In States having two Reps., each of its two Districts,
by choosing two Electors, would furnish the quota of four. In all other States the
difficulty would occur. And as uniformity is so justly an object, it would seem best to
let the State Legislatures appoint or provide for the appointment of the two additional
Electors, and for filling the Electoral vacancies, limiting the time within which the
appointment must be made.

“Would it not be better to retain the word ‘immediately’ in requiring the two Houses
to proceed to the choice of P. & V. P., than to change it into ‘without separating.’ If
the change could quicken and ensure a final ballot, it would certainly be a good one.
But as it might give rise to disputes as to the validity of an Election, after an
adjournment and separation forced by a repetition of abortive ballotings, the existing
term might perhaps as well remain & take its chance of answering its purpose. The
distinction between a regulation which is directory only, and one a departure from
which would have a viciating effect, is not always obvious; and in the delicate affair
of electing a Chief Magistrate it will be best to hazard as little as possible a discussion
of it.

“In the appeal to the second meeting of Electors, their choice is limited to the two
names having the highest number of votes given at the first meeting. As there may be
an equality of votes among several highest on the list, the option ought to be enlarged
accordingly, as well with a view to obviate uncertainty, as to deal equally with equal
pretensions.

“The expedient of resorting to a second meeting of the Presidential Electors, in order
to diminish the risk of a final resort to Congress, has certainly much to recommend it.
But the evil to be guarded as it would lose not a little of its formidable aspect, by the
substitution of a joint ballot of the members of Congress, for a vote by States in the
Representative branch: which the prolonged period during which the Electors must be
in appointment before their final votes would be given, relinquishes the contemplated
advantage of functions to be so quickly commenced and closed as to preclude
extraneous management & intrigue. The increased trouble and expence are of minor
consideration, tho’ not to be entirely disregarded. It may be more important to remark,
that in cases where from an equality of votes in the Electoral List, more than two

names might be sent back to the Electors, very serious embarrassments & delays
might happen from miscalculations or perverse dispositions in some of so many
distinct meetings, and that after all, no perfect security would exist agst. an ultimate
devolution of the choice on Congress. Still it may be a fair question whether a second
meeting of Electors, with its prospect of preventing an election by the members of the
Legislature, would not be preferable to a single meeting with the greater probability of
a resort to them.”—Copy kindly loaned by W. H. Gibbes, Esq. of Columbia, S. C.

On January 30, 1826, he wrote to Robert Taylor, concerning the proposed amendment
to the Constitution introduced in the Senate Dec. 15, 1825.

“It seems to be generally agreed that some change in the mode of electing the
Executive Magistrate is desirable, that would produce more uniformity & equality,
with a better security for concentrating the major will of the nation, and less risk of an
eventual decision in the national Legislature.

“The amendment reported by the Committee of the Senate is very ably prepared &
recommended. But I think there are advantages in the intervention of Electors, and
inconveniences in a direct vote by the people, which are not sufficiently adverted to in
the Report.

“One advantage of Electors is, that as Candidates, & still more as competitors
personally known in the Districts, they will call forth the greater attention of the
people: another advantage is, that altho’ generally the mere mouths of their
Constituents, they may be intentionally left sometimes to their own judgment, guided
by further information that may be acquired by them: and finally, what is of material
importance, they will be able, when ascertaining, which may not be till a late hour,
that the first choice of their constituents is utterly hopeless, to substitute in the
electoral vote the name known to be their second choice.

“If the election be referred immediately to the people, however they may be liable to
an excess of excitement on particular occasions, they will on ordinary occasions and
where the candidates are least known feel too little; yielding too much to the
consideration that in a question depending on millions of votes individual ones are not
worth the trouble of giving them. There would be great encouragement therefore for
active partizans to push up their favorites to the upper places on the list and by that
means force a choice between candidates, to either of whom others lower on the list
would be preferred. Experience gives sufficient warning of such results.

“An election by Districts, instead of general tickets, & State Legislatures, and an
avoidance of a decision by the House of Representatives voting by States, would
certainly be changes much for the better: and a combination of them may be made
perhaps acceptable both to the large and to the small States. I subjoin the sketch of an
elective process which occurred to me some years ago, but which has never been so
thoroughly scrutinized as to detect all the flaws that may lurk in it.”—Chic. Hist. Soc.
MSS.

[1 ]See Monroe’s Writings (Hamilton), VI., 323, et seq. On Nov. 1, Madison wrote to
Jefferson:

“With the British power & navy combined with our own we have nothing to fear from
the rest of the World; and in the great struggle of the Epoch between liberty and
despotism, we owe it to ourselves to sustain the former in this hemisphere at least. I
have even suggested an invitation to the B. Govt to join in applying the ‘small effort
for so much good’ to the French invasion of Spain, & to make Greece an object of
some such favorable attention. Why Mr. Canning & his colleagues did not sooner
interpose against the calamity wch. could not have escaped foresight cannot be
otherwise explained but by the different aspect of the question when it related to
liberty in Spain, and to the extension of British Commerce to her former
Colonies.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]April 13, 1824, Madison wrote to Monroe.

“I never had a doubt that your Message proclaiming the just & lofty sentiments of ten
millions, soon to become twenty, enjoying in tranquil freedom the rich fruits of
successful revolution, would be recd in the present crisis of Europe with exulting
sympathies by all such men as Fayette, and with envenomed alarm by the partisans of
despotism. The example of the U. S. is the true antidote to the doctrines & devices of
the Holy Allies, and if continued as we trust it will be, must regenerate the old world,
if its regeneration be possible.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ](See Vol. II., p. 326 of the Secret Journals now in print which I presume you
have)—Madison’s note. See for the report ante Vol. I., p. 82; for the letter, Vol. II., p.
64. On Feb. 27, 1824, Madison wrote Rush:

“Almost at the moment of receiving yours of Decr. 28, my hand casually fell on the
inclosed scrap, which I must have extracted from the Author,2 [borrowed for the
purpose] on some occasion when the right of navigating the Mississippi engaged my
attention. I add it to my former inclosures on that subject, merely as pointing to one
source of information which may lead to others fuller & better.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Alexander Hill Everett’s New Ideas on Population, with Remarks on the Theories
and Godwin of Malthus. London and Boston, 1822. See Madison to Jefferson, ante,
Vol. II., p. 246.

[1 ]Barbour was then a Senator from Virginia. He said in his letter: “The most
important part [of the President’s message] will refer, but remotely however, to the
probable interference of the Allied Powers in the internal concerns of the Spanish
provinces. The information received furnishes too much ground to believe that a
design of that sort is seriously meditated. I have a serious thought of proposing a
resolution advising the President to co-operate by treaty with Great Britain to prevent
it. If it be not asking too much of you I should be very much gratified with your views
on this interesting subject.”—Mad. MSS.

[2 ]Madison wrote to Monroe, December 6:

“I rec., by yesterday’s mail your favor of the 4th, covering a copy of the Message &
another copy under a blank cover. It presents a most interesting view of the topics
selected for it. The observations on the foreign ones are well moulded for the
occasion, which is rendered the more delicate & serious by the equivocal indications
from the Brit. Cabinet. The reserve of Canning after his frank & earnest conversations
with Mr. Rush is mysterious & ominous. Could he have stepped in advance of his
Superiors? or have they deserted their first objects? or have the allies shrunk from
theirs? or is any thing taking place in Spain which the adroitness of the Brit Govt. can
turn agst. the allies, and in favor of S. America? Whatever may be the explanation,
Canning ought in Candour, after what had passed with Mr. Rush, not to have withheld
it; and his doing so enjoins a circumspect reliance on our own Councils & energies.
One thing is certain that the contents of the Message will receive a very close
attention every where, and that it can do nothing but good anywhere.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]New Views of the Constitution of the United States. By John Taylor of Caroline,
Washington, 1823. Taylor was at this time a Senator from Virginia.

[1 ]From the original kindly contributed by Miss Sally J. Newman, “Hilton,” Va.

[1 ]On the proposed alteration of the tariff submitted to the consideration of the
members of South Carolina in the ensuing Congress. Columbia, 1824.

[1 ]Notice of his death arrived before this was sent.—Madison’s Note. Under date
February 29, 1824, Cartwright sent Madison his book, England’s Constitution,
produced and illustrated.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The relations between Madison and Livingston which had not been cordial for
some years were now amicable. Madison wrote Monroe April 13, 1824: “Mr.
Livingston may be assured that I never considered our personal relations to be other
than friendly and that I am more disposed to cherish them by future manifestations
than to impair them by recollections of any sort.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The convention relative to navigation, fishing, and trading in the Pacific and to
establishments on the northwest coast between the United States and Russia was
concluded April 17, 1824, at St. Petersburg.—Treaties and Conventions, (Ed. 1889),
p. 931.

[1 ]A Dissertation on the Nature and Extent of the Jurisdiction of the Courts of the
United States. Philadelphia, 1824.

[1 ]By these the common Law or any other laws may be sanctioned or introduced
within the territories or other places subject to the conclusive power of Legislation
vested in Congress.—Madison’s Note.

[1 ]The list enclosed was as follows:

Centy. I.    - - - Clemens Episte. to the Corinthians - published at Cambridge
             1788.
             Ignatius Epists - - - - - - - - - - - - Amsterdam 1607.
             Cotelier - Recuiel de Monumens des pères dans les tems apostoliques
             edit par le Cleve Amsterdam 1774, 2 v. fol.
             Flavius Josephus [in English by Whiston] Amsterdam 1726, 2v. fol.
             Philo Judaeus [Greek & Latin] English Edn. 1742, 2 v. fol, Lucian’s
             Works - -- Amsterdam 1743, 3 v. 4°.
             Fabricius Biblio Græc:
             -- - - Delectus &c. See Moshm. v. 1, p. 106.
Cent: II.    Justin Martyrs apolos, &c. [Edited by Prudent Maraud Benedictine]
             1742, 1 v. fol.
             Hermias - - Oxford 1700 - 8°.
             Athenagoras - - Oxford 1706 - 8°.
             Clemens Alexandrinus [Ed. by Potter] Oxford 1715 2 vol. fol.
             Tertullian - - - - - - - - - - - - - Venice 1746, 1 v. fol., Theophilus of
             Antioch [first adopted the term Trinity] - 1742 1 v. fol.
             Irenaeus [Ed. by Grabe] 1702, 1 v. fol.
             Tatian - agst the Gentiles - Oxford, 1700, 8°.
             Ammonius Saccas’s Harmony of the Evangelists-
             Celsus [translated par Bouhereau] Amsterdam 1700 4°.
Cent. III.   Minutius Felix [translated by Reeves] Leiden 1672, 8°.
             Origen - - - 4 vol. fol. Greek & Latin.
             Cyprian - - [translated into French by Lombert] 1 v. fol.
             Gregory Thaumaturgus-Grec. & Lat. 1626, 1 v. fol.
             Arnobius Africanus. Amsterdam 1651, 1 v. 4°.
             Anatolius - - - - - Antwerp, 1634, 1 v. fol.
             Methodius Eubulius - Rome 1656, 8°.
             Philostratus life of Apollonius Tyanaeus [Grec. & Lat. with notes by
             Godefroy Olearius, Leipsic, 1709, 1 v. fol: Frenched by De Vigenere,
             Englished in part by Chs. Blount]
Cent: IV.    Lactantius.—Edit by Lenglet Paris 1748, 2 v. 4°.
             Eusebius of Cæsarea - -
             Athanasius, par Montfauçon 1698, 3 v. fol.
             Antonius’ [founder of the Monastic order] seven letters &c. Latin.
             St. Cyril (of Jerusalem) Gr. & Lat. Paris 1720, 1 v. fol.
             St. Hilary. Ed. by Massci Verona 1730.
             Lucifer, Bishop of Cagliari. Paris 1586 1 v. 8°.
             Epiphanius. Gr. & Lat. Edit Pere Petau, 1622, 2 v. fol.
             Optatus. Ed. by Dupin, 1700. fol.
             Pacianus. Paris, 1538. 4°.
             Basil (B. of Cæsarea) Gr. & Lat. 1721, 3 v. fol.
             Gregory (of Nazianzi) G. & L. Paris 1609-11 2 v. fol.
1 With life by Kippis 1788.—Madison’s Note.

           - - - - (of Nyssa) 1615 2 v. fol.
           Ambrosius—Paris 1690 2 v. fol.
           Jerome. - - - Paris 1693-1706, 5 v. fol.
           Ruffinus - - Paris 1580 - - - 1 v. fol.
           Augustin - - - - - 1679-1700 8 v. fol.
           Chrysostom John Gr. & L.— 10 v. fol.
           Ammianus Marcellinus
           Julian’s works
Cent: V.   Sulpicius Severus. Verona 1754, 2 v. 4°.
           Isidorus (of Pelusium) Paris 1638. Gr. & L. 1 v. fol.
           Cyril (of Alexa) Gr. & L. 6 v. fol.
           Orosius - - Leyden. 1738, 4°.
           Theodoret. Edit by Pere Simond. G. & L. 1642. 4 v. fol. in 1684, vol.
           V. by Garnier.
           Philostorgius, by Godefroi. G. & L. 1642, 1 v. 4°.
           Vincentius Lyrinensis. Rome. 4°.
           Socrates’ Eccles. History.
           Sozomen. do. do.
           Leo (the great) by Quesnel Lyons. 1700, fol.
           Æneas (of Gaza) Gr. with Latin version, by Barthius &c. 1655, 4°.
Miscellaneous Thomas Aquinas [Dor. Angelicus] Head of the Thomists, 12 v. fol.
           The Koran, Duns Scotus [Doctor Subtilis] Head of the Scotists, 12 v.
           fol.
           Caves Lives of the Fathers. Dailles Use & abuse of them.
           Erasmus, Luther, Calvin, Socinus, Bellarmin, Chilling-worth.
           Council of Trent by F. Paul; by Palavicini; by Basnaze.
           Grotius on the truth of Xn Religion. Sherlock’s [Bishop] Sermons.
           Tillotsons &c. Tillemont, Baronius, Lardner,1 Hookers Ecclesiastical
           Polity. Pierson on the Creed. Bossuet on 39 Articles Pascal’s lettres
           Provenciales. do Penseès. Fenelon Bossuet.
           Bourdelon Sauvin Fletcher Manillon. Warburton’s Divine Legation.
           Hannah Adams—View of all Religions.
           Stackhouses - - Hist. of the Bible.
           Sr. Isaac Newtons works on Religious subjects.
           Locke’s do. Stillingfleets controversy with him on the possibility of
           endowing matter with thought.
           Clarke on the Being & Attributes of God.
           - - - Sermons.
           Butler’s Analogy. Eight Sermons at Boyles. Lectures by Bentley.
           Whitby on the 5 points.
           Whiston’s Theological Works.
           Taylor (Jeremiah) Sermons.
1 With life by Kippis 1788.—Madison’s Note.

    John Taylor [of Norwich] agst original Sin Edward’s in answer.
    Edward’s on free will - - - - on virtue.
    Soame Jenyn’s Enquiry into the nature & origin of evil Liturgy for
    King’s Chapel Boston.
    Matheis Essays to do good. Price on Morals.
    Wallaston’s Religion of Nature delineated.
    Barclay’s apology for Quakers. Wm. Penn’s works.
    King’s Enquiry into the Constitution discipline & worship of the
    Church, within 3 first cent.
    King [Wm.] Essay on Origin of Evil; notes by Law. Wesley on
    Original Sin.
    Priestley’s & Horesley’s controversies.
    Historical view of the Controversy on the intermediate state of the
    Soul by Dean Blackburne.
    The Confessional by same.
    Jone’s method of settling the canonical Scripture of N. Testt.
    Leibnitz on Goodness of God, liberty of man & origin of evil.
    Paley’s Works. Warburton’s principles of Nat. & Revd. Religion.
    Blairs Sermons. Buckmeisters (of Boston) do.
    Necker’s importance of Religion.
    Latrobe’s (Benjamin) Doctrine of the Moravians.
    Ray’s wisdom of God in the Creation.
    Durham’s Astrotheology.
    Bibliotheca fratrum Polonorum 9 vol. fol.
1 With life by Kippis 1788.—Madison’s Note.

The Catalogue of Eastburn & Co. New York, particularly the Theological part at the
end, deserves attention. Some rare books are found in it, and might probably be
bought at cheap prices.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]July, 1826. For a more recollected view of this matter, see an account of the origin
& progress of the “Constitution of Virginia,” by J. M. & among his
papers.—Madison’s Note. See ante, Vol. I., p. 32.

[2 ]From the family papers of the late J. Henley Smith, Esq., of Washington, D. C.
When Lafayette arrived Madison wrote to him, August 21, 1824:

“I this instant learn, my dear friend, that you have safely reached the shores, where
you will be hailed by every voice of a free people. That of no one, as you will believe,
springs more from the heart than mine. May I not hope that the course of your
movements will give me an opportunity of proving it, by the warmth of my embrace
on my own threshold. Make me happy by a line to that effect when you can snatch a
moment for a single one from the eager gratulations pouring in upon you.”—Mad.
MSS.

[1 ]The House of Representatives was about to vote for the candidates for the
Presidency and elected John Quincy Adams over Crawford and Jackson, on February
9th.

[1 ]Biddle was then President of the United States Bank. He replied April 26th that
the bank had adopted a rule forbidding the advance of money on real estate for
indeterminate periods.

[1 ]The apoplectic attack & its effect as related by Dr Waterhouse should be extracted
from his letter and accompany this—Madison’s Note. Waterhouse wrote June 30th
from Cambridge:

“You may have seen in the papers that the miserable General H[ull] has been treated
with a public dinner; at which presided a son of the late worthy Govr. Sullivan, and
nephew to the General—a degenerate plant of a strange (foreign) vine—the bitterest,
& most inveterate of the whole high-federal gang—a man notorious for having
dishonored his Father and his Mother, and who had doubtless congenial feelings with
the military convict.

“I mentioned that Hull had a stroke of apoplexy, a year, perhaps, before his
appointment of General on the Canada expedition. I have refreshed my memory since
I came home, and therefore repeat, that a few miles from my house, at a review of the
Middlesex militia, whereof the late Speaker General Varnum was commanding
officer, General Hull fell senseless, and, if I recollect rightly, was carried home in that
condition; from which time, he never appeared to be the man he was before, insomuch
that I remember people spoke of it, when his appointment was announced.—The
gallant General Miller called on me yesterday when we refreshed each other’s
memories on the events of Hull.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]These peculiarities, it wd. seem are not of equal force in the South American
States, owing in part perhaps to a former degradation produced by colonial vassalage,
but principally to the lesser contrast of colours. The difference is not striking between
that of many of the Spanish & Portuguese Creoles & that of many of the mixed
breed.—Madison’s Note. Miss Wright’s pamphlet was A Plan for the gradual
abolition of Slavery in the United States without danger or loss to the Citizens of the
South, Baltimore, 1825.

[1 ]George Rapp, founder of the sect of Harmonists or Harmonites.

[1 ]Vindication of the Argument a priori in Proof of the Being and Attributes of God,
from the Objection of Dr. Waterland.

[1 ]The paper was the draft of a protest drawn up by Jefferson with a view to its
adoption by the Virginia assembly. Jefferson’s Writings (P. L. Ford), xii., 418 n.

[1 ]The extract was as follows:

“The Secretary of State will not deny that, whatever may have been the intentions of

the framers of a constitution or of a law; that intention is to be sought for in the
instrument itself, according to the usual and established rules of construction. Nothing
is more common than for laws to express and effect more or less than was intended.
If, then, a power to erect a corporation in any case, be deducible by fair inference
from the whole, or any part, of the numerous provisions of the constitution of the U.
States, arguments drawn from extrinsic circumstances regarding the intention of the
convention, must be rejected.”

Washington’s message of March 24, 1796, said:

“Having been a member of the General Convention, and knowing the principles on
which the Constitution was formed, I have ever entertained but one opinion on this
subject. . . .

“There is also reason to believe that this construction agrees with the opinions
entertained by the State Conventions, when they were deliberating on the
Constitution. . . .

“If other proofs than these, and the plain letter of the Constitution itself, be necessary
to ascertain the point under consideration, they may be found in the Journals of the
General Convention, which I have deposited in the office of the Department of State.
In those Journals it will appear, that a proposition was made ‘that no treaty should be
binding on the United States which was not ratified by a law,’ and that the proposition
was explicitly rejected.”—Annals of Cong., 4th Cong., 1st Sess., p. 761.

[1 ]From the original kindly loaned by Frederick D. McGuire, Esq., of Washington,
D. C.

[1 ]See Jefferson’s recital of his financial reverses in his letter.—Jefferson’s Writings
(P. L. Ford), xii., 457.

[1 ]From “A Collection of Papers on Political, Literary and Moral Subjects.” By Noah
Webster, LL.D. New York, 1843, p. 172.

See the letter of Oct. 12, 1804, to Webster, ante, Vol. VII., p. 164, which this letter
amends. The member who introduced Madison’s motion in the Virginia legislature
was John Tyler.

[1 ]Jefferson died July 4th.

[1 ]Copy of the original in the Virginia Historical Society. The enclosure was a copy
of the Memorial and Remonstrance against religious assessments. See ante, Vol. II.,
p. 183.

[1 ]Van Buren wrote from Albany that he intended to propose an amendment to the
constitution on the subject of internal improvements in the next Congress, having
already done so in the last two sessions. He would be pleased if Madison would draft
the amendment.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]On October 15 Madison wrote to Van Buren acknowledging the receipt of the
report of the committee on roads and canals: “The committee have transcended all
preceding advocates of the doctrine they espouse, in appealing to the old articles of
Confederation for its support. Whatever might have been the practice under those
articles it would be difficult to shew that it was always kept within the prescribed
limits. The Revolutionary Congress was the Offspring of the great crisis, and the
exercise of its powers prior to the final ratification of the articles, governed by the law
of necessity, or palpable expediency. And after that event there seems to have been
often more regard to the former latitude of proceeding than to the text of the
Instrument; assumptions of power apparently useful, being considered little dangerous
in a Body so feeble, and so completely dependent on the authority of the States. There
isno evidence however that the old Congs. ever assumed such a construction of the
terms ‘Com?on defence & general welfare’ as is claimed for the new. Nor is it
probable that Gen: Washington in the sentiments quoted from or for him, had more in
view than the great importance of measures beyond the reach of individual States,
and, if to be executed at all, calling for the general authority of the Union. Such
modes of deducing power, may be fairly answered by the question, what is the power
that may not be grasped with the aid of them?”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]From the original owned by the late J. Henley Smith of Washington. Smith’s
address was printed in 1827 (Washington): “Memoir of the life, character and
writings of Thomas Jefferson; delivered in the Capitol, before the Columbian institute
on the sixth of January, 1827, and published at their request.”

[1 ]The work was printed by Thomas Jefferson Randolph. It may be seen in the Works
of Jefferson (P. L. Ford), Federal Edition, i., 3.

[1 ]She came to the United States in 1825 at Lafayette’s suggestion.

[1 ]From the original kindly loaned by Mrs. Sally Newman, “Hillton,” Va.

[1 ]From the original owned by the late J. Henley Smith, of Washington, D. C.

[1 ]To Henry Lee, February, 1827, Madison wrote:

“The plan in question embraced—1. An expedition into Lake Huron with 4 or 5
vessels, & 800 or 1,000 men, to obtain possession of Mackinaw & St. Josephs. 2. An
expedition with the forces under General Brown, to Burlington Heights preparatory to
further operations for reducing the Peninsula; the expedition to depend on Chauncey’s
getting the command of Lake Ontario without which supplies could not be secured. 3.
the building of 14 or 15 armed boats at Sacket’s Harbour, so to command the St
Lawrence under the protection of posts to be supplied from Izard’s command, as to
intercept the communication between Montreal & Kingston. 4. The main force under
Izard to make demonstrations towards Montreal, in order to divert the Enemy from
operations westward, and afford the chance of compelling Prevost to fight
disadvantageously, or break up his connection with Lake Champlaine.

“I pass to the reference you make to certain appointments both for the army and for
the Cabinet. Selections for office, always liable to error was particularly so for
military command at the commencement of the late war. The survivors of the
Revolutionary band who alone had been instructed by experience in the field were but
few; and of those several of the most distinguished, were disqualified by age or
infirmities, or precluded by foreknown objections in the advisory Branch of the
appointing Department. This last cause deprived the army of services which would
have been very acceptable to the nominating Branch. Among those who had acquired
a mere disciplinary experience, no sufficient criterion of military capacity existed; and
of course they had to undergo tests of another sort, before they were marked out for
high military trusts.

“That the appointment of Hull was unfortunate, was but too soon made certain. Yet he
was not only recommended from respectable quarters, but by his ostensible fitness
also. He was a man of good understanding. He had served with reputation, and even
some eclât in the Revolutionary Army; He had been the Govr. at Detroit, and could
not but be acquainted with the population & localities on the hostile as well as on his
own side of the boundary; And he had been the superintendant of our Affairs with the
Indians, a knowledge of which was of much importance. These advantages seemed to
give him not only a preference, but an appropriateness for his trust. They were
nevertheless fallacious; and it is not unworthy of recollection, that after the disaster
which proved it, some who had been most warm in his recommendation, were most
ready to condemn the confidence put in him.

“The appointment of Genl. Dearborn is also very unfavorably noticed. To say nothing
of his acknowledged bravery & firmness, his military experience & local knowledge
acquired during the Revolutionary war, had their value. And he had administered the
Department of War for 8 years, to the satisfaction of the then President who thought
well not only of his specific qualifications; but generally of his sound and practical
judgment. To these considerations were added a public standing calculated to repress
jealousies in others, not easy to be guarded agst. in such cases, and always of the
worst tendency; It may well be questioned, whether any substituted appointment
would at the time have been more satisfactory.

“The advanced position in the service, given to General Smyth was much to be
regretted. Some of the circumstances which led to it were specious, and the scale &
cultivation of his understanding very respectable, but his talent for military command
was equally mistaken by himself, and by his friends.

“Before I advert to your review of Cabinet appointments, I must allude to the field of
choice as narrowed by considerations never to be wholly disregarded. Besides the
more essential requisites in the candidate, an eye must be had to his political
principles and connexions, his personal temper and habits, his relations of feelings
towards those with whom he is to be associated; and the quarter of the Union to which
he belongs. These considerations, the last as little as any are not to be disregarded, but
in cases where qualifications of a transcendant order, designate individuals, and
silence the patrons of competitors whilst they satisfy the public opinion. Add to the
whole, the necessary sanction of the Senate; and what may also be refused, the

necessary consent of the most eligible individual: You are probably very little aware
of the number of refusals experienced during the period to which your observations
apply.

“I must be allowed to express my surprize at the unfavorable view taken of the
appointment of Mr. Jones. I do not hesitate to pronounce him the fittest minister who
had ever been charged with the Navy Department. With a strong mind well stored
with the requisite knowledge, he possessed great energy of character and indefatigable
application to business. I cannot doubt that the evidence of his real capacity, his
appropriate acquirements, and his effective exertions, in a most arduous service, & the
most trying scenes, now to be found on the files of the Department, as well as my
own, would reverse the opinion which seems to have been formed of him. Nor in
doing him justice ought it to be omitted that he had on his hands, the Treasury as well
as Navy Department, at a time when both called for unusual attention, and that he did
not shrink from the former, for which he proved himself qualified, till the double
burden became evidently insupportable.

“Mr. Campbell was the only member of the Cabinet from the West whose claims to a
representation in it, were not unworthy of attention under existing circumstances. It
was not indeed the quarter most likely to furnish fiscal qualifications; but it is certain
that he had turned his thoughts that way, whilst in public life more than appears to
have been generally known. He was, moreover, a man of sound sense, of pure
integrity, and of great application. He held the office at a period when the difficulties
were of a sort scarcely manageable by the ablest hands, and when the ablest hands
were least willing to encounter them. It happened also that soon after he entered on
his task, his ill health commenced, & continued to increase till it compelled him to
leave the department.

“Of Mr. Crowninshield it may be said without claiming too much for him, that he had
not only recd. public testimonies of respectability in a quarter of the Union feeling a
deep interest in the Department to which he was called, but added to a stock of
practical good sense, a useful stock of nautical experience and information; and an
accommodating disposition particularly valuable in the head of that Department, since
the auxiliary establishment of the Navy Board, on which the labouring oar now
devolves. Superior talents without such a disposition, would not suit the delicacy of
the legal relations between the Secretary & the Board, and the danger of collisions of
very embarrassing tendency.

“As you have made no reference to Docr. Eustis, I ought perhaps to observe a like
silence. But having gone so far on the occasion, I am tempted to do him the justice of
saying that he was an acceptable member of the Cabinet, that he possessed an
accomplished mind, a useful knowledge on military subjects derived from his
connexion with the Revolutionary army, and a vigilant superintendance of
subordinate agents; and that his retreat from his station, proceeded from causes not
inconsistent with these endowments. With the overload of duties required by military
preparations on the great scale enjoined by law, and the refusal to him of assistants
asked for who were ridiculed as crutches for official infirmity, no minister could have
sustained himself; unless in the enjoyment of an implicit confidence on the part of the

public, ready to account for every failure, without an impeachment of his official
competency. In ordinary times Eustis wd. have satisfied public expectation, & even in
those he had to struggle with, the result wd. have been very different with
organizations for the War Dept. equivalent to what has been found so useful in a time
of peace for an army reduced to so small an establishment.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The report was submitted by Thomas H. Benton, March 1.

[1 ]“You will perceive that the Genl. Assembly has again pronounced the opinion that
Duties for the protection of domestic manufactures are unconstitutional. I made an
effort to amend the resolution in the Senate so as to declare the increased duties of
1824 impolitic and unwise, but lost the motion by a vote of 14 to 8. . . . In the debate
in the House of Delegates, Genl. Taylor quoted the opinion of Mr. Jefferson as
expressed in his messages to Congress. Mr Giles declared in reply that he knew that
Mr. Jefferson had changed his opinion as to the Constitutionality of protecting Duties,
& referred to a private letter which he had received from him. I have not seen the
letter myself: but I believe a letter has been shewn to some of the members.” Cabell to
Madison, Richmond, March 12, 1827.—Mad. MSS. See Jefferson to Giles, December
25, 1825. (Writings, Ford, xii., 424, Federal Edition.)

[1 ]Wanderings in Washington.—Madison’s Note.

[1 ]Ante, Vol. I., p. 32.

[1 ]Richard Rush, as Secretary of the Treasury, in his report for 1827 advanced the
usual protectionist argument in favor of the benefit to agriculturalists of a better
market from the increased number of artisans. Cong. Debates, 20th. Cong., 1st Sess.,
p. 2824.

[1 ]The MS. draft has the word “erased” here followed by “Hamilton,” which is struck
out.

[1 ]Madison’s declination was addressed to Francis Brooke and printed in the
Richmond Enquirer March 4:

Montpellier, Feby 22, 1828.

Dear Sir,

The mail of last evening brought me your circular communication, by which I am
informed of my being nominated by the Convention at Richmond on the 8th of Jany
one of the Electors recommended for the next appointment of Chief Magistrate of the
U. States.

Whilst I express the great respect I feel to be due to my fellow Citizens composing
that assembly, I must request that another name be substituted for mine on their
Electoral ticket.

After a continuance in Public Life, with a very brief interval, through a period of more
than forty years, and at the age then attained, I considered myself as violating no duty,
in allotting for what of life might remain, a retirement from scenes of political
agitation & excitement. Adhering to this view of my situation, I have forborne during
the existing contest, as I had done during the preceding, to participate in any measures
of a party character; and the restraint imposed on myself, is necessarily strengthened
by an admonishing sense of increasing years. Nor, with these considerations could I
fail to combine, a recollection of the Public relations in which I had stood to the
distinguished Individuals now dividing the favour of their country, and the proofs
given to both, of the high estimation in which they were held by me.

In offering this explanation, I hope I may be pardoned for not suppressing a wish,
which must be deeply & extensively felt, that the discussions incident to the
depending contest, may be conducted in a spirit and manner, neither unfavorable to a
dispassionate result, nor unworthy of the great & advancing cause of Representative
Government.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]The speech was on the right of the Vice-President to call a senator to order for
words spoken in debate. He said: “. . . But the leading division in the Convention was
between those who, distrustful of the States, sought to abridge their powers, that those
of the new government might be enlarged; and those who, on their part, distrustful,
perhaps jealous of the government about to be created, were as strenuous to retain all
powers not indispensably necessary to enable the federal government to discharge the
specified and limited duties to be imposed upon it.”—Substance of Mr. Van Buren’s
observations on Mr. Foot’s amendment to the Rules of the Senate. Washington, 1828.

[1 ]The draft of this letter is marked “not sent.” Lehre wrote from Charleston:
“Disunion is now publicly spoken of & advocated by men, who heretofore always
reprobated such an Idea. What would Mr. Jefferson say if he was now alive, to see the
great strides that are now making to destroy the beautiful Republican System of
Government, the best the world ever saw, which he & yourself laboured so long to
establish for the welfare and happiness of your Country.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]On Sept. 27 Cabell wrote Madison asking permission to print this letter and on
October 15 Madison replied that because of the all-absorbing interest in the
impending presidential election it must not be printed until the election was over and
the public mind should be in a tranquil state—Mad. MSS.

Madison wrote to Cabell again October 30:

“In my letter of September 18th, I stated briefly the grounds on which I rested my
opinion that a power to impose duties & restrictions on imports with a view to
encourage domestic productions, was constitutionally lodged in Congress. In the
observations then made was involved the opinion also, that the power was properly
there lodged. As this last opinion necessarily implies that there are cases in which the
power may be usefully exercised by Congress, the only Body within our political
system capable of exercising it with effect, you may think it incumbent on me to point
out cases of that description.

“I will premise that I concur in the opinion that, as a general rule, individuals ought to
be deemed the best judges, of the best application of their industry and resources.

“I am ready to admit also that there is no Country in which the application may, with
more safety, be left to the intelligence and enterprize of individuals, than the U.
States.

“Finally, I shall not deny that, in all doubtful cases, it becomes every Government to
lean rather to a confidence in the judgment of individuals, than to interpositions
controuling the free exercise of it.

“With all these concessions, I think it can be satisfactorily shewn, that there are
exceptions to the general rule, now expressed by the phrase ‘Let us alone,’ forming
cases which call for interpositions of the competent authority, and which are not
inconsistent with the generality of the rule.

“1. The Theory of ‘Let us alone,’ supposes that all nations concur in a perfect freedom
of commercial intercourse. Were this the case, they would, in a commercial view, be
but one nation, as much as the several districts composing a particular nation; and the
theory would be as applicable to the former, as to the latter. But this golden age of
free trade has not yet arrived; nor is there a single nation that has set the example. No
Nation can, indeed, safely do so, until a reciprocity at least be ensured to it. Take for a
proof, the familiar case of the navigation employed in a foreign commerce. If a nation
adhering to the rule of never interposing a countervailing protection of its vessels,
admits foreign vessels into its ports free of duty, whilst its own vessels are subject to a
duty in foreign ports, the ruinous effect is so obvious, that the warmest advocate for
the theory in question, must shrink from a universal application of it.

“A nation leaving its foreign trade, in all cases, to regulate itself, might soon find it
regulated by other nations, into a subserviency to a foreign interest. In the interval
between the peace of 1783, and the establishment of the present Constitution of the U.
States, the want of a General Authority to regulate trade, is known to have had this
consequence. And have not the pretensions & policy latterly exhibited by G. Britain,
given warning of a like result from a renunciation of all countervailing regulations, on
the part of the U. States. Were she permitted, by conferring on certain portions of her
Domain the name of Colonies, to open from these a trade for herself, to foreign
Countries, and to exclude, at the same time, a reciprocal trade to such colonies by
foreign Countries, the use to be made of the monopoly needs not be traced. Its
character will be placed in a just relief, by supposing that one of the Colonial Islands,
instead of its present distance, happened to be in the vicinity of G. Britain, or that one
of the Islands in that vicinity, should receive the name & be regarded in the light of a
Colony, with the peculiar privileges claimed for colonies. Is it not manifest, that in
this case, the favored Island might be made the sole medium of the commercial
intercourse with foreign nations, and the parent Country thence enjoy every essential
advantage, as to the terms of it, which would flow from an unreciprocal trade from
her other ports with other nations.

“Fortunately the British claims, however speciously coloured or adroitly managed
were repelled at the commencement of our comercial career as an Independent
people; and at successive epochs under the existing Constitution, both in legislative
discussions and in diplomatic negotiations. The claims were repelled on the solid
ground, that the Colonial trade as a rightful monopoly, was limited to the intercourse
between the parent Country & its Colonies, and between one Colony and another; the
whole being, strictly in the nature of a coasting trade from one to another port of the
same nation; a trade with which no other nation has a right to interfere. It follows of
necessity, that the Parent Country, whenever it opens a Colonial port for a direct trade
to a foreign Country, departs itself from the principle of Colonial Monopoly, and
entitles the foreign Country to the same reciprocity in every respect, as in its
intercourse with any other ports of the nation.

“This is common sense, and common right. It is still more, if more could be required;
it is in conformity with the established usage of all nations, other than Great Britain,
which have Colonies; notwithstanding British representations to the contrary. Some of
those Nations are known to adhere to the monopoly of their Colonial trade, with all
the rigor & constancy which circumstances permit. But it is also known, that
whenever, and from whatever cause, it has been found necessary or expedient, to open
their Colonial ports to a foreign trade, the rule of reciprocity in favour of the foreign
party was not refused, nor, as is believed, a right to refuse it ever pretended.

“It cannot be said that the reciprocity was dictated by a deficiency of the commercial
marine. France, at least could not be, in every instance, governed by that
consideration; and Holland still less, to say nothing of the navigating States of
Sweden and Denmark, which have rarely if ever, enforced a colonial monopoly. The
remark is indeed obvious, that the shipping liberated from the usual conveyance of
supplies from the parent Country to the Colonies, might be employed in the new
channels opened for them in supplies from abroad.

“Reciprocity, or an equivalent for it, is the only rule of intercourse among
Independent communities; and no nation ought to admit a doctrine, or adopt an
invariable policy, which would preclude the counteracting measures necessary to
enforce the rule.

“2. The Theory supposes moreover a perpetual peace, not less chimerical, it is to be
feared, than a universal freedom of commerce.

“The effect of war among the commercial and manufacturing nations of the World, in
raising the wages of labour and the cost of its products, with a like effect on the
charges of freight and insurance, needs neither proof nor explanation. In order to
determine, therefore, a question of economy between depending on foreign supplies,
and encouraging domestic substitutes, it is necessary to compare the probable periods
of war, with the probable periods of peace; and the cost of the domestic
encouragement in times of peace, with the cost added to foreign articles in times of
War.

“During the last century the periods of war and peace have been nearly equal. The

effect of a state of war in raising the price of imported articles, cannot be estimated
with exactness. It is certain, however, that the increased price of particular articles,
may make it cheaper to manufacture them at home.

“Taking, for the sake of illustration, an equality in the two periods, and the cost of an
imported yard of cloth in time of war to be 9½ dollars, and in time of peace to be 7
dollars, whilst the same could, at all times, be manufactured at home, for 8 dollars, it
is evident that a tariff of 1¼ dollar on the imported yard, would protect the home
manufacture in time of peace, and avoid a tax of 1½ dollars imposed by a state of war.

“It cannot be said that the manufactories, which could not support themselves in
periods of peace, would spring up of themselves at the recurrence of war prices. It
must be obvious to every one, that, apart from the difficulty of great & sudden
changes of employment, no prudent capitalists would engage in expensive
establishments of any sort, at the commencement of a war of uncertain duration, with
a certainty of having them crushed by the return of peace.

“The strictest economy, therefore, suggests, as exceptions to the general rule, an
estimate, in every given case, of war & peace periods and prices, with inferences
therefrom, of the amount of a tariff which might be afforded during peace, in order to
avoid the tax resulting from war. And it will occur at once, that the inferences will be
strengthened, by adding to the supposition of wars wholly foreign, that of wars in
which our own country might be a party.1

“3. It is an opinion in which all must agree, that no nation ought to be unnecessarily
dependent on others for the munitions of public defence, or for the materials essential
to a naval force, where the nation has a maritime frontier or a foreign commerce to
protect. To this class of exceptions to the theory may be added the instruments of
agriculture and of mechanic arts, which supply the other primary wants of the
community. The time has been when many of these were derived from a foreign
source, and some of them might relapse into that dependence were the encouragement
to the fabrication of them at home withdrawn. But, as all foreign sources must be
liable to interruptions too inconvenient to be hazarded, a provident policy would
favour an internal and independent source as a reasonable exception to the general
rule of consulting cheapness alone.

“4. There are cases where a nation may be so far advanced in the pre-requisites for a
particular branch of manufactures, that this, if once brought into existence, would
support itself; and yet, unless aided in its nascent and infant state by public
encouragement and a confidence in public protection, might remain, if not altogether,
for a long time unattempted, or attempted without success. Is not our cotton
manufacture a fair example? However favoured by an advantageous command of the
raw material, and a machinery which dispenses in so extraordinary a proportion with
manual labour, it is quite probable that, without the impulse given by a war cutting off
foreign supplies and the patronage of an early tariff, it might not even yet have
established itself; and pretty certain that it would be far short of the prosperous
condition which enables it to face, in foreign markets, the fabrics of a nation that
defies all other competitors. The number must be small that would now pronounce

this manufacturing boon not to have been cheaply purchased by the tariff which
nursed it into its present maturity.

“5. Should it happen, as has been suspected, to be an object, though not of a foreign
Government itself, of its great manufacturing capitalists, to strangle in the cradle the
infant manufactures of an extensive customer or an anticipated rival, it would surely,
in such a case, be incumbent on the suffering party so far to make an exception to the
‘let alone’ policy as to parry the evil by opposite regulations of its foreign commerce.

“6. It is a common objection to the public encouragement of particular branches of
industry, that it calls off labourers from other branches found to be more profitable;
and the objection is, in general, a weighty one. But it loses that character in proportion
to the effect of the encouragement in attracting skilful labourers from abroad.
Something of this sort has already taken place among ourselves, and much more of it
is in prospect; and as far as it has taken or may take place, it forms an exception to the
general policy in question.

“The history of manufactures in Great Britain, the greatest manufacturing nation in
the world, informs us, that the woollen branch, till of late her greatest branch, owed
both its original and subsequent growths to persecuted exiles from the Netherlands;
and that her silk manufactures, now a flourishing and favourite branch, were not less
indebted to emigrants flying from the persecuting edicts of France. [Anderson’s
History of Commerce.]

“It appears, indeed, from the general history of manufacturing industry, that the
prompt and successful introduction of it into new situations has been the result of
emigrations from countries in which manufactures had gradually grown up to a
prosperous state; as into Italy, on the fall of the Greek Empire; from Italy into Spain
and Flanders, on the loss of liberty in Florence and other cities; and from Flanders and
France into England, as above noticed. [Franklin’s Canadian Pamphlet.]

“In the selection of cases here made, as exceptions to the ‘let alone’ theory, none have
been included which were deemed controvertible; and if I have viewed them, or a part
of them only, in their true light, they show what was to be shown, that the power
granted to Congress to encourage domestic products by regulations of foreign trade
was properly granted, inasmuch as the power is, in effect, confined to that body, and
may, when exercised with a sound legislative discretion, provide the better for the
safety and prosperity of the nation.”

Notes.

“It does not appear that any of the strictures on the letters from J. Madison to J. C.
Cabell have in the least invalidated the constitutionality of the power in Congress to
favour domestic manufactures by regulating the commerce with foreign nations.

“1. That this regulating power embraces the object remains fully sustained by the
uncontested fact that it has been so understood and exercised by all commercial and
manufacturing nations, particularly by Great Britain; nor is it any objection to the
inference from it, that those nations, unlike the Congress of the United States, had all
other powers of legislation as well as the power of regulating foreign commerce, since
this was the particular and appropriate power by which the encouragement of
manufactures was effected.

“2. It is equally a fact that it was generally understood among the States previous to
the establishment of the present Constitution of the United States, that the
encouragement of domestic manufactures by regulations of foreign commerce,
particularly by duties and restrictions on foreign manufactures, was a legitimate and
ordinary exercise of the power over foreign commerce; and that, in transferring this
power to the Legislature of the United States, it was anticipated that it would be
exercised more effectually than it could be by the States individually. [See Lloyd’s
Debates and other publications of the period.]

“It cannot be denied that a right to vindicate its commercial, manufacturing, and
agricultural interests against unfriendly and unreciprocal policy of other nations,
belongs to every nation, that it has belonged at all times to the United States as a
nation; that, previous to the present Federal Constitution, the right existed in the
governments of the individual States, not in the Federal Government; that the want of
such an authority in the Federal Government was deeply felt and deplored; that a
supply of this want was generally and anxiously desired; and that the authority has, by
the substituted Constitution of the Federal Government, been expressly or virtually
taken from the individual States; so that, if not transferred to the existing Federal
Government it is lost and annihilated for the United States as a nation. Is not the
presumption irresistible, that it must have been the intention of those who framed and
ratified the Constitution, to vest the authority in question in the substituted
Government? and does not every just rule of reasoning allow to a presumption so
violent a proportional weight in deciding on a question of such a power in Congress,
not as a source of power distinct from and additional to the constitutional source, but
as a source of light and evidence as to the true meaning of the Constitution?

“3. It is again a fact, that the power was so exercised by the first session of the first
Congress, and by every succeeding Congress, with the sanction of every other branch
of the Federal Government, and with universal acquiescence, till a very late date. [See
the Messages of the Presidents and the Reports and Letters of Mr. Jefferson.]

“4. That the surest and most recognized evidence of the meaning of the Constitution,
as of a law, is furnished by the evils which were to be cured or the benefits to be
obtained; and by the immediate and long-continued application of the meaning to
these ends. This species of evidence supports the power in question in a degree which
cannot be resisted without destroying all stability in social institutions, and all the
advantages of known and certain rules of conduct in the intercourse of life.

“5. Although it might be too much to say that no case could arise of a character
overruling the highest evidence of precedents and practice in expounding a

constitution, it may be safely affirmed that no case which is not of a character far
more exorbitant and ruinous than any now existing or that has occurred, can authorize
a disregard of the precedents and practice which sanction the constitutional power of
Congress to encourage domestic manufactures by regulations of foreign commerce.

“The importance of the question concerning the authority of precedents, in
expounding a constitution as well as a law, will justify a more full and exact view of
it.

“It has been objected to the encouragement of domestic manufactures by a tariff on
imported ones, that duties and imposts are in the clause specifying the sources of
revenue, and therefore cannot be applied to the encouragement of manufactures when
not a source of revenue.

“But, 1. It does not follow from the applicability of duties and imposts under one
clause for one usual purpose, that they are excluded from an applicability under
another clause to another purpose, also requiring them, and to which they have also
been usually applied. “2. A history of that clause, as traced in the printed journal of
the Federal Convention, will throw light on the subject.

“It appears that the clause, as it originally stood, simply expressed ‘a power to lay
taxes, duties, imposts, and excises,’ without pointing out the objects; and, of course,
leaving them applicable in carrying into effect the other specified powers. It appears,
farther, that a solicitude to prevent any constructive danger to the validity of public
debts contracted under the superseded form of government, led to the addition of the
words ‘to pay the debts.’

“This phraseology having the appearance of an appropriation limited to the payment
of debts, an express appropriation was added ‘for the expenses of the Government,’
&c.

“But even this was considered as short of the objects for which taxes, duties, imposts,
and excises might be required; and the more comprehensive provision was made by
substituting ‘for expenses of Government’ the terms of the old Confederation, viz.:
and provide for the common defence and general welfare, making duties and imposts,
as well as taxes and excises, applicable not only to payment of debts, but to the
common defence and general welfare.

“The question then is, What is the import of that phrase, common defence and general
welfare, in its actual connexion? The import which Virginia has always asserted, and
still contends for, is, that they are explained and limited to the enumerated objects
subjoined to them, among which objects is the regulation of foreign commerce; as far,
therefore, as a tariff of duties is necessary and proper in regulating foreign commerce
for any of the usual purposes of such regulations, it may be imposed by Congress,
and, consequently, for the purpose of encouraging manufactures, which is a well-
known purpose for which duties and imposts have been usually employed. This view
of the clause providing for revenue, instead of interfering with or excluding the power

of regulating foreign trade, corroborates the rightful exercise of power for the
encouragement of domestic manufactures.

It may be thought that the Constitution might easily have been made more explicit and
precise in its meaning. But the same remark might be made on so many other parts of
the instrument, and, indeed, on so many parts of every instrument of a complex
character, that, if completely obviated, it would swell every paragraph into a page and
every page into a volume, and, in so doing, have the effect of multiplying topics for
criticism and controversy.

The best reason to be assigned, in this case, for not having made the Constitution
more free from a charge of uncertainty in its meaning, is believed to be, that it was not
suspected that any such charge would ever take place; and it appears that no such
charge did take place, during the early period of the Constitution, when the meaning
of its authors could be best ascertained, nor until many of the contemporary lights had
in the lapse of time been extinguished. How often does it happen, that a notoriety of
intention diminishes the caution against its being misunderstood or doubted! What
would be the effect of the Declaration of Independence, or of the Virginia Bill of
Rights, if not expounded with a reference to that view of their meaning?

“Those who assert that the encouragement of manufactures is not within the scope of
the power to regulate foreign commerce, and that a tariff is exclusively appropriated
to revenue, feel the difficulty of finding authority for objects which they cannot admit
to be unprovided for by the Constitution; such as ensuring internal supplies of
necessary articles of defence, the countervailing of regulations of foreign countries,
&c., unjust and injurious to our navigation or to our agricultural products. To bring
these objects within the constitutional power of Congress, they are obliged to give to
the power “to regulate foreign commerce” an extent that at the same time necessarily
embraces the encouragement of manufactures; and how, indeed, is it possible to
suppose that a tariff is applicable to the extorting from foreign Powers of a reciprocity
of privileges and not applicable to the encouragement of manufactures, an object to
which it has been far more frequently applied?”

He wrote again December 5:

“Has not the passage in Mr. Jefferson’s letter to Mr. Giles, to which you allude,
denouncing the assumptions of power by the General Government, been in some
respects misunderstood? ‘They assume,’ he says, ‘indefinitely that also over
Agriculture and Manufactures.’ It would seem that writing confidentially, & probably
in haste, he did not discriminate with the care he otherwise might have done, between
an assumption of power and an abuse of power; relying on the term ‘indefinitely’ to
indicate an excess of the latter, and to imply an admission of a definite or reasonable
use of the power to regulate trade for the encouragement of manufacturing and
agricultural products. This view of the subject is recommended by its avoiding a
variance with Mr. Jefferson’s known sanctions, in official acts & private
correspondence, to a power in Congress to encourage manufactures by comercial
regulations. It is not easy to believe that he could have intended to reject altogether
such a power. It is evident from the context that his language was influenced by the

great injustice, impressed on his mind, of a measure charged with the effect of taking
the earnings of one, & that the most suffering class, & putting them into the pockets
of another, & that the most flourishing class. Had Congress so regulated an impost for
revenue merely, as in the view of Mr. Jefferson to oppress one section of the Union &
favor another, it may be presumed that the language used by him, would have been
not less indignant, tho the Tariff, in that case, could not be otherwise complained of,
than as an abuse, not as a usurpation of power; or, at most, as an abuse violating the
spirit of the Constitution, as every unjust measure must that of every Constitution,
having justice for a cardinal object. No Constitution could be lasting without an
habitual distinction between an abuse of legitimate power, and the exercise of a
usurped one. It is quite possible that there might be a latent reference in the mind of
Mr. Jefferson to the reports of Mr. Hamilton & Executive recommendations, to
Congress favorable to indefinite power over both Agriculture and Manufactures. He
might have seen also the report of a Committee of a late Congress presented by Mr.
Steward, of Pennsylvania, which in supporting the cause of internal improvement,
took the broad ground of ‘General Welfare,’ (including, of course, every internal as
well as external power,) without incurring any positive mark of disapprobation from
Congress.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Correspondence between John Quincy Adams, esquire, President of the United
States, and several citizens of Massachusetts, concerning the charge of a design to
dissolve the union alleged to have existed in that state. Boston, 1829.

[1 ]Cabell wrote from Warminster: “May I take the liberty to ask that you will be so
good as to read the enclosed pamphlet and to inform me whether the argument in the
speech respecting the rights of the parties to the compact be sound and in conformity
to your own views of the subject, and if there be error, where and to what extent, it
exists.” He had advanced the propositions in the pamphlet in the State Senate and
afterwards written them out as a speech with notes for printing—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Cabell sent the resolutions of the sessions of 1825-26, 1826-27, and 1828-29. The
first declared:—“That the imposition of taxes and duties by the Congress of the U.
States, for the purpose of protecting and encouraging domestic manufactures, is an
unconstitutional exercise of power and is highly oppressive and partial in its
operations.”

The second:—“That this General Assembly does hereby most solemnly protest
against any claim or exercise of power, whatever, on the part of the General
Government, which serves to draw money from the inhabitants of this state, into the
treasury of the U. States and to disburse it for any object whatever, except for carrying
into effect the grants of power to the General Government contained in the
Constitution of the U. States,” and

“That this General Assembly does most solemnly protest against the claim or exercise
of any power, whatever, on the part of the General Government, to protect domestic
manufactures, the protection of manufactures not being amongst the grants of power
to that government specified in the constitution of the U. States,—and also against the
operations of the Act of Congress, passed May 22., 1824, entitled ‘An Act to amend

the several acts imposing duties on imports’ generally called the tariff law, which vary
the distribution of the proceeds of the labour of the community, in such a manner as to
transfer property from one portion of the United States to another, and to take private
property from the owner for the benefit of another person, not rendering public
service,—as unconstitutional, unwise, unjust, unequal and oppressive.”

The third:—“That this General Assembly of Virginia, actuated by the desire of
guarding the constitution from all violation, anxious to preserve and perpetuate the
Union and to execute with fidelity the trust reposed in it by the people, as one of the
high contracting parties, feels itself bound to declare, and it hereby most solemnly
declares its deliberate conviction that the acts of Congress usually denominated the
tariff laws passed avowedly for the protection of American manufactures are not
authorized by the plain construction true intent and meaning of the
constitution.”—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Ante Vol. VIII, p. 447.

[1 ]See letter to N. P. Trist; and see also the distinction between an expatriating
individual withdrawing only his person and moveable effects, and the withdrawal of a
State mutilating the domain of the Union.—Madison’s Note.

The Virginia Expatriation Act was that of October, 1783, Sec. III. Hening’s Stats. at
Large, XI, 325. The letter to Trist was dated February 15, 1830.

It has been too much the case in expounding the Constitution of the U. S. that its
meaning has been sought not in its peculiar and unprecedented modifications of
Power; but by viewing it, some through the medium of a simple Govt others thro’ that
of a mere League of Govts. It is neither the one nor the other, but essentially different
from both. It must consequently be its own interpreter. No other Government can
furnish a key to its true character. Other Governments present an individual &
indivisible sovereignty. The Constitution of the U. S. divides the sovereignty, the
portions surrendered by the States, composing the Federal sovereignty over specified
subjects, the portions retained forming the sovereignty of each over the residuary
subjects within its sphere. If sovereignty cannot be thus divided, the Political System
of the United States is a chimæra, mocking the vain pretensions of human wisdom. If
it can be so divided, the system ought to have a fair opportunity of fulfilling the
wishes & expectations which cling to the experiment.

Nothing can be more clear than that the Constitution of the U. S. has created a
Government, in as strict a sense of the term, as the Governments of the States created
by their respective Constitutions. The Federal Govt. has like the State govts. its
Legislative, its Executive & its Judiciary Departments. It has, like them,
acknowledged cases in which the powers of these departments are to operate. And the
operation is to be directly on persons & things in the one Govt as in the others. If in
some cases, the jurisdiction is concurrent as it is in others exclusive, this is one of the
features constituting the peculiarity of the system.

In forming this compound scheme of Government it was impossible to lose sight of

the question, what was to be done in the event of controversies which could not fail to
occur, concerning the partition line, between the powers belonging to the Federal and
to the State Govts. That some provision ought to be made, was as obvious and as
essential, as the task itself was difficult and delicate.

That the final decision of such controversies, if left to each of the 13 now 24 members
of the Union, must produce a different Constitution & different laws in the States was
certain; and that such differences must be destructive of the common Govt & of the
Union itself, was equally certain. The decision of questions between the common
agents of the whole & of the parts, could only proceed from the whole, that is from a
collective not a separate authority of the parts.

The question then presenting itself could only relate to the least objectionable mode of
providing for such occurrences, under the collective authority.

The provision immediately and ordinarily relied on, is manifestly the Supreme Court
of the U. S., clothed as it is, with a Jurisdiction “in controversies to which the U. S.
shall be a party;” the Court itself being so constituted as to render it independent &
impartial in its decisions, [see Federalist, No. 39, p. 241] whilst other and ulterior
resorts would remain in the elective process, in the hands of the people themselves the
joint constituents of the parties; and in the provision made by the Constitution for
amending itself. All other resorts are extra & ultra constitutional, corresponding to the
Ultima Ratio of nations renouncing the ordinary relations of peace.

If the Supreme Court of the U. S. be found or deemed not sufficiently independent
and impartial for the trust committed to it, a better Tribunal is a desideratum. But
whatever this may be, it must necessarily derive its authority from the whole not from
the parts, from the States in some collective not individual capacity. And as some
such Tribunal is a vital element, a sine qua non, in an efficient & permanent Govt the
Tribunal existing must be acquiesced in, until a better or more satisfactory one can be
substituted.

Altho’ the old idea of a compact between the Govt & the people be justly exploded,
the idea of a compact among those who are parties to a Govt. is a fundamental
principle of free Govt.

The original compact is the one implied or presumed, but nowhere reduced to writing,
by which a people agree to form one society. The next is a compact, here for the first
time reduced to writing, by which the people in their social state agree to a Govt. over
them. These two compacts may be considered as blended in the Constitution of the U.
S., which recognises a union or society of States, and makes it the basis of the Govt.
formed by the parties to it.

It is the nature & essence of a compact that it is equally obligatory on the parties to it,
and of course that no one of them can be liberated therefrom without the consent of
the others, or such a violation or abuse of it by the others, as will amount to a
dissolution of the compact.

Applying this view of the subject to a single community, it results, that the compact
being between the individuals composing it, no individual or set of individuals can at
pleasure, break off and set up for themselves, without such a violation of the compact
as absolves them from its obligations. It follows at the same time that, in the event of
such a violation, the suffering party rather than longer yield a passive obedience may
justly shake off the yoke, and can only be restrained from the attempt by a want of
physical strength for the purpose. The case of individuals expatriating themselves,
that is leaving their country in its territorial as well as its social & political sense, may
well be deemed a reasonable privilege, or rather as a right impliedly reserved. And
even in this case equitable conditions have been annexed to the right which qualify
the exercise of it.

Applying a like view of the subject to the case of the U. S. it results, that the compact
being among individuals as imbodied into States, no State can at pleasure release
itself therefrom, and set up for itself. The compact can only be dissolved by the
consent of the other parties, or by usurpations or abuses of power justly having that
effect. It will hardly be contended that there is anything in the terms or nature of the
compact, authorizing a party to dissolve it at pleasure.

It is indeed inseparable from the nature of a compact, that there is as much right on
one side to expound it & to insist on its fulfilment according to that exposition, as
there is on the other so to expound it as to furnish a release from it, and that an
attempt to annul it by one of the parties, may present to the other, an option of
acquiescing in the annulment, or of preventing it as the one or the other course may be
deemed the lesser evil. This is a consideration which ought deeply to impress itself on
every patriotic mind, as the strongest dissuasion from unnecessary approaches to such
a crisis. What would be the condition of the States attached to the Union & its Govt
and regarding both as essential to their well-being, if a State placed in the midst of
them were to renounce its Federal obligations, and erect itself into an independent and
alien nation? Could the States N. & S. of Virginia, Pennsyla. or N. York, or of some
other States however small, remain associated and enjoy their present happiness, if
geographically politically and practically thrown apart by such a breach in the chain
which unites their interests and binds them together as neighbours & fellow citizens.
It could not be. The innovation would be fatal to the Federal Governt. fatal to the
Union, and fatal to the hopes of liberty and humanity; and presents a catastrophe at
which all ought to shudder.

Without identifying the case of the U. S. with that of individual States, there is at least
an instructive analogy between them. What would be the condition of the State of N.
Y. of Massts. or of Pena for example, if portions containing their great commercial
cities, invoking original rights as paramount to social & constitutional compacts,
should erect themselves into distinct & absolute sovereignties? In so doing they would
do no more, unless justified by an intolerable oppression, than would be done by an
individual State as a portion of the Union, in separating itself, without a [Editor:
illegible word] cause, from the other portions. Nor would greater evils be inflicted by
such a mutilation of a State of some of its parts, than might be felt by some of the
States from a separation of its neighbours into absolute and alien sovereignties.

Even in the case of a mere League between nations absolutely independent of each
other, neither party has a right to dissolve it at pleasure; each having an equal right to
expound its obligations, and neither, consequently a greater right to pronounce the
compact void than the other has to insist on the mutual execution of it. [See, in Mr.
Jefferson’s volumes, his letters to J. M. Mr. Monroe & Col. Carrington].

Having suffered my pen to take this ramble over a subject engaging so much of your
attention, I will not withhold the notes made by it from your persual. But being aware
that without more development & precision, they may in some instances be liable to
misapprehension or misconstruction, I will ask the favour of you to return the letter
after it has passed under your partial & confidential eye.

I have made no secret of my surprize and sorrow at the proceedings in S. Carolina,
which are understood to assert a right to annul the Acts of Congress within the State,
& even to secede from the Union itself. But I am unwilling to enter the political field
with the “telum imbelle” which alone I could wield. The task of combating such
unhappy aberrations belongs to other hands. A man whose years have but reached the
canonical three-score-&-ten (and mine are much beyond the number) should distrust
himself, whether distrusted by his friends or not, and should never forget that his
arguments, whatever they may be will be answered by allusions to the date of his
birth.

With affect. respects,

[1 ]From Proceedings and Debates of the Virginia State Convention of 1829-30.
Richmond, 1830. In 1827-28 the people of the State voted in favor of holding a State
convention to revise the constitution and Madison accepted service as a delegate, this
being his last public employment. He made but one speech, although he offered
several motions. The question before the convention was the qualification for
suffrage. The report says: “Mr. Madison now rose and addressed the Chair. The
members rushed from their seats, and crowded around him.”

He made the following memorandum suggested by the question (See also ante, Vol.
IV., pp. 120, 121, n.)

NOTE DURING THE CONVENTION FOR AMENDING THE
CONSTITUTION OF VIRGINIA.

The right of suffrage being of vital importance, and approving an extension of it to
House keepers & heads of families, I will suggest a few considerations which govern
my judgment on the subject.

Were the Constitution on hand to be adapted to the present circumstances of our
Country, without taking into view the changes which time is rapidly producing, an
unlimited extension of the right wd probably vary little the character of our public

councils or measures. But as we are to prepare a system of Govt for a period which it
is hoped will be a long one, we must look to the prospective changes in the condition
and composition of the society on which it is to act.

It is a law of nature, now well understood, that the earth under a civilized cultivation
is capable of yielding subsistence for a large surplus of consumers, beyond those
having an immediate interest in the soil, a surplus which must increase with the
increasing improvements in agriculture, and the labor-saving arts applied to it. And it
is a lot of humanity that of this surplus a large proportion is necessarily reduced by a
competition for employment to wages which afford them the bare necessaries of life.
That proportion being without property, or the hope of acquiring it, can not be
expected to sympathize sufficiently with its rights, to be safe depositories of power
over them.

What is to be done with this unfavored class of the community? If it be, on one hand,
unsafe to admit them to a full share of political power, it must be recollected, on the
other, that it cannot be expedient to rest a Republican Govt on a portion of the society
having a numerical & physical force excluded from, and liable to be turned against it,
and which would lead to a standing military force, dangerous to all parties & to liberty
itself.

This view of the subject makes it proper to embrace in the partnership of power, every
description of citizens having a sufficient stake in the public order, and the stable
administration of the laws, and particularly the House keepers & Heads of families;
most of whom “having given hostages to fortune,” will have given them to their
Country also.

This portion of the community, added to those, who although not possessed of a share
of the soil, are deeply interested in other species of property, and both of them added
to the territorial proprietors, who in a certain sense may be regarded as the owners of
the Country itself, form the safest basis of free Government. To the security for such a
Govt. afforded by these combined numbers, may be further added, the political &
moral influence emanating from the actual possession of authority and a just &
beneficial exercise of it.

It would be happy if a State of Society could be found or framed, in which an equal
voice in making the laws might be allowed to every individual bound to obey them.
But this is a Theory, which like most Theories, confessedly requires limitations &
modifications, and the only question to be decided in this as in other cases, turns on
the particular degree of departure, in practice, required by the essence & object of the
Theory itself.

It must not be supposed that a crowded state of population, of which we have no
example here, and which we know only by the image reflected from examples
elsewhere, is too remote to claim attention.

The ratio of increase in the U. S. shows that the present.

12 Millions will in 25 years be  24 Mils.
24 Millions will in 50 years be  48 Mils.
48 Millions will in 75 years be  96 Mils.
96 Millions will in 100 years be 192 Mils.

There may be a gradual decrease of the rate of increase. but it will be small as long as
agriculture shall yield its abundance. G. Britain has doubled her population in the last
50 years; notwithstanding its amount in proportion to its territory at the
commencement of that period, and Ireland is a much stronger proof of the effect of an
increasing product of food, in multiplying the consumers.

How far this view of the subject will be affected by the Republican laws of descent
and distribution, in equalizing the property of the citizens and in reducing to the
minimum mutual surplusses for mutual supplies, cannot be inferred from any direct
and adequate experiment. One result would seem to be a deficiency of the capital for
the expensive establishments which facilitate labour and cheapen its products on one
hand, and, on the other, of the capacity to purchase the costly and ornamental articles
consumed by the wealthy alone, who must cease to be idlers and become labourers.
Another the increased mass of labourers added to the production of necessaries by the
withdrawal for this object, of a part of those now employed in producing luxuries, and
the addition to the labourers from the class of present consumers of luxuries. To the
effect of these changes, intellectual, moral, and social, the institutions and laws of the
Country must be adapted, and it will require for the task all the wisdom of the wisest
patriots.

Supposing the estimate of the growing population of the U. S. to be nearly correct,
and the extent of their territory to be 8 or 9 hundred Mils of acres, and one fourth of it
to consist of inarable surface, there will in a century or a little more, be nearly as
crowded a population in the U. S. as in G. Britain or France, and if the present
Constitution (of Virginia) with all its flaws, lasted more than half a century, it is not
an unreasonable hope that an amended one will last more than a century.

If these observations be just, every mind will be able to develop & apply
them.—Mad. MSS.

[1 ]Copy of the original kindly contributed by W. H. Gibbes, Esq., of Columbia, S. C.

[2 ]The report was introduced in the House by McDuffie, April 13. It may be found in
Cong. Debates, 21st Cong. 1st Session, p. 103, appendix.

[1 ]The pamphlet was Propositions for amending the Constitution of the United
States, providing for the election of President and Vice-President, and guarding
against the undue exercise of Executive influence, patronage and power. Washington,
1830. It was a revival of Hillhouse’s proposed amendments to the constitution offered
in the Senate in 1808.

[1 ]This letter was printed by Edward Everett in the North American Review, for
October, 1830, vol. 31, p. 537.

[2 ]Having received a copy of Senator Robert Y. Hayne’s speeches on the constitution
which began January 19, 1830, Madison wrote to him, the draft being dated “Apr.
(say 3d or 4th).”

“I recd in due time your favor enclosing your two late speeches, and requesting my
views of the subject they discuss. The speeches could not be read without leaving a
strong impression of the ability & eloquence which have justly called forth the
eulogies of the public. But there are doctrines espoused in them from which I am
constrained to dissent. I allude particularly to the doctrine which I understand to assert
that the States perhaps their Governments have, singly, a constitutional right to resist
& by force annul within itself acts of the Government of the U. S. which it deems
unauthorized by the Constitution of the U. S.; although such acts be not within the
extreme cases of oppression, which justly absolve the State from the Constitutional
compact to which it is a party.

“It appears to me that in deciding on the character of the Constitution of the U. S. it is
not sufficiently kept in view that being an unprecedented modification of the powers
of Govt it must not be looked at thro’ the refracting medium either of a consolidated
Government, or of a confederated Govt; that being essentially different from both, it
must be its own interpreter according to its text and the facts of the case.

“Its characteristic peculiarities are 1. the mode of its formation. 2. its division of the
supreme powers of Govt. between the States in their united capacity, and the States in
their individual capacities.

“1. It was formed not by the Governments of the States as the Federal Government
superseded by it was formed; nor by a majority of the people of the U. S. as a single
Community, in the manner of a consolidated Government.

“It was formed by the States, that is by the people of each State, acting in their highest
sovereign capacity thro’ Conventions representing them in that capacity, in like
manner and by the same authority as the State Constitutions were formed; with this
characteristic & essential difference that the Constitution of the U. S. being a compact
among the States that is the people thereof making them the parties to the compact
over one people for specified objects can not be revoked or changed at the will of any
State within its limits as the Constitution of a State may be changed at the will of the
State, that is the people who compose the State & are the parties to its constitution &
retained their powers over it. The idea of a compact between the Governors & the
Governed was exploded with the Royal doctrine that Government was held by some
tenure independent of the people.

“The Constitution of the U. S. is therefore within its prescribed sphere a Constitution
in as strict a sense of the term as are the Constitutions of the individual States, within
their respective spheres.

“2. And that it divides the supreme powers of Govt. between the two Governments is
seen on the face of it; the powers of war & taxation, that is of the sword & the purse,
of commerce of treaties &c. vested in the Govt. of the U. S. being of as high a
character as any of the powers reserved to the State Govts.

“If we advert to the Govt of the U. S. as created by the Constitution it is found also to
be a Govt in as strict a sense of the term, within the sphere of its powers, as the Govts
created by the Constitutions of the States are within their respective spheres. It is like
them organized into a Legislative, Executive & Judicial Dept. It has, like them,
acknowledged cases in which the powers of those Departments are to operate and the
operation is to be the same in both; that is directly on the persons & things submitted
to their power. The concurrent operation in certain cases is one of the features
constituting the peculiarity of the system.

“Between these two Constitutional Govts, the one operating in all the States, the
others operating in each respectively; with the aggregate powers of Govt divided
between them, it could not escape attention, that controversies concerning the
boundary of Jurisdiction would arise, and that without some adequate provision for
deciding them, conflicts of physical force might ensue. A political system that does
not provide for a peaceable & authoritative termination of occurring controversies,
can be but the name & shadow of a Govt the very object and end of a real Govt. being
the substitution of law & order for uncertainty confusion & violence.

“That a final decision of such controversies, if left to each of 13 State now 24 with a
prospective increase, would make the Constitution & laws of the U. S. different in
different States, was obvious; and equally obvious that this diversity of independent
decisions must disorganize the the Government of the Union, and even decompose the
Union itself.

“Against such fatal consequences the Constitution undertakes to guard 1. by declaring
that the Constitution & laws of the States in their united capacity shall have effect,
anything in the Constitution or laws of any State in its individual capacity to the
contrary notwithstanding, by giving to the Judicial authority of the U. S. an appellate
supremacy in all cases arising under the Constitution; & within the course of its
functions, arrangements supposed to be justified by the necessity of the case; and by
the agency of the people & Legislatures of the States in electing & appointing the
Functionaries of the Common Govt. whilst no corresponding relation existed between
the latter and the Functionaries of the States.

“2. Should these provisions be found notwithstanding the responsibility of the
functionaries of the Govt. of the U. S. to the Legislatures & people of the States not to
secure the State Govts against usurpations of the Govt. of the United States there
remains within the purview of the Constn. an impeachment of the Executive &
Judicial Functionaries, in case of their participation in the guilt, the prosecution to
depend on the Representatives of the people in one branch, and the trial on the
Representatives of the States in the other branch of the Govt. of the U. S.

“3. The last resort within the purview of the Constn is the process of amendment

provided for by itself and to be executed by the States.

“Whether these provisions taken together be the best that might have been made; and
if not, what are the improvements, that ought to be introduced, are questions
altogether distinct from the object presented by your communication, which relates to
the Constitution as it stands.

“In the event of a failure of all these Constitutional resorts against usurpations and
abuses of power and of an accumulation thereof rendering passive obedience &
nonresistance a greater evil than resistance and revolution, there can remain but one
resort, the last of all, the appeal from the cancelled obligation of the Constitutional
compact to original rights and the law of self-preservation. This is the Ultima ratio,
under all Governments, whether consolidated, confederated, or partaking of both
those characters. Nor can it be doubted that in such an extremity a single State would
have a right, tho’ it would be a natural not a constitutional Right to make the appeal.
The same may be said indeed of particular portions of any political community
whatever so oppressed as to be driven to a choice between the alternative evils.

“The proceedings of the Virginia Legislature (occasioned by the Alien and Sedition
Acts) in which I had a participation, have been understood it appears, as asserting a
Constitutional right in a single State to nullify laws of the U. S. that is to resist and
prevent by force the execution of them, within the State.

“It is due to the distinguished names who have given that construction of the
Resolutions and the Report on them to suppose that the meaning of the Legislature
though expressed with a discrimination and fulness sufficient at the time may have
been somewhat obscured by an oblivion of contemporary indications and impressions.
But it is believed that by keeping in view distinctions (an inattention to which is often
observable in the ablest discussions of the subjects embraced in those proceedings)
between the Governments of the States & the States in the sense in which they were
parties to the Constitution; between the several modes and objects of interposition
agst the abuses of Power; and more especially between interpositions within the
purview of the Constitution, and interpositions appealing from the Constitution to the
rights of nature, paramount to all Constitutions; with these distinctions kept in view,
and an attention always of explanatory use to the views and arguments which are
combated, a confidence is felt that the Resolutions of Virga as vindicated in the
Report on them, are entitled to an exposition shewing a consistency in their parts, and
an inconsistency of the whole with the doctrine under consideration.

“On recurring to the printed Debates in the House of Delegates on the occasion,
which were ably conducted, and are understood to have been, for the most part at
least, revised by the Speakers, the tenor of them does not disclose any reference to a
constitutional right in an individual State to arrest by force the operation of a law of
the U. S. Concert among the States for redress agst the Alien & Sedition laws as acts
of usurped power, was a leading sentiment, and the attainment of a Concert the
immediate object of the course adopted, which was an invitation to the other States ‘to
concur in declaring the acts to be unconstitutional, and to co-operate by the necessary
& proper measures in maintaining unimpaired the authorities rights and liberties

reserved to the States respectively or to the people.’ That by the necessary & proper
measures to be concurrently & co-operatively taken were meant measures known to
the Constitution, particularly the control of the Legislatures and people of the States
over the Cong. of the U. S. cannot well be doubted.

“It is worthy of remark, and explanatory of the intentions of the Legislature, that the
words ‘and not law, but utterly null void & of no power or effect’* which in the
Resolutions before the House followed the word unconstitutional, were near the close
of the debate stricken out by common consent. It appears that the words had been
regarded as only surplusage by the friends of the Resolution, but lest they should be
misconstrued into a nullifying import instead of a declaration of opinion, the word
unconstitutional alone was retained, as more safe agst. that error. The term
nullification to which such an important meaning is now attached, was never a part of
the Resolutions and appears not to have been contained in the Kentucky Resolutions
as originally passed, but to have been introduced at an after date.

“Another and still more conclusive evidence of the intentions of the Legislature is
given in their Address to their Constituents accompanyg. the publication of their
Resoln. The address warns them agst the encroaching spirit of the Gen Govt.; argues
the unconstitutionality of the Alien & Sedition laws, enumerates the other instances in
which the Constitutional limits had been overleaped; dwells on the dangerous mode of
deriving power by implication; and in general presses the necessity of watching over
the consolidating tendency of the Fedr. policy. But nothing is said that can be
understood to look to means of maintaing the rights of the States beyond the regular
ones within the forms of the Constitution.

“If any further lights on the subject could be needed a very strong one is reflected
from the answers given to the Resolutions by the States who protested agst. them.
Their great objection, with a few undefined complaints of the spirit & character of the
Resolutions, was directed agst the assumed authority of a State Legislature to declare
a law of the U. S. to be unconstitutional which they considered an unwarrantable
interference with the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the U. S. Had the
Resolutions been regarded as avowing & maintaining a right in an individual State to
arrest by force the execution of a law of the U. S. it must be presumed that it would
have been a pointed and conspicuous object of their denunciation.

“In this review I have not noticed the idea entertained by some that disputes between
the Govt of the U. S. and those of the individual States may & must be adjusted by
negotiation, as between independent Powers.

“Such a mode as the only one of deciding such disputes would seem to be as
expressly at variance with the language and provisions of the Constitution as in a
practical view it is pregnant with consequences subversive of the Constitution. It may
have originated in a supposed analogy to the negociating process in cases of disputes
between separate branches or Departments of the same Govt. but the analogy does not
exist. In the case of disputes between independent parts of the same Govt neither of
them being able to consummate its pretensions, nor the Govt to proceed without a co-
operation of the several parts necessity brings about an adjustment. In disputes

between a State Govt and the Govt. of the U. S. the case is both theoretically &
practically different; each party possessing all the Departments of an organized
Governmt Legislative Ex. & Judl., and having each a physical force at command.

“This idea of an absolute separation & independence between the Govt. of the U. S.
and the State Govts as if they belonged to different nations alien to each other has too
often tainted the reasoning applied to Constitutional questions. Another idea not less
unsound and sometimes presenting itself is, that a cession of any part of the rights of
sovereignty is inconsistent with the nature of sovereignty, or at least a degradation of
it. This would certainly be the case if the cession was not both mutual & equal, but
when there is both mutuality & equality there is no real sacrifice on either side, each
gaining as much as it grants, and the only point to be considered is the expediency of
the compact and that to be sure is a point that ought to be well considered. On this
principle it is that Treaties are admissible between Independent powers, wholly alien
to each other, although privileges may be granted by each of the parties at the expense
of its internal jurisdiction. On the same principle it is that individuals entering into the
social State surrender a portion of their equal rights as men. If a part only made the
surrender, it would be a degradation; but the surrenders being mutual, and each
gaining as much authority over others as is granted to others over him, the inference is
mathematical that in theory nothing is lost by any; however different the result may be
in practice.

“I am now brought to the proposal which claims for the States respectively a right to
appeal agst an exercise of power by the Govt. of the U. S. which by the States is
decided to be unconstitutional, to a final decision by ¾ of the parties to the
Constitution. With every disposition to take the most favorable view of this expedient
that a high respect for its Patrons could prompt I am compelled to say that it appears
to be either not necessary or inadmissible.

“I take for granted it is not meant that pending the appeal the offensive law of the U.
S. is to be suspended within the State. Such an effect would necessarily arrest its
operation everywhere, a uniformity in the operation of laws of the U. S. being
indispensable not only in a Constitutional and equitable, but in most cases in a
practicable point of view, and a final decision adverse to that of the Appellant State
would afford grounds to all kinds of complaint which need not be traced.

“But aside from those considerations, it is to be observed that the effect of the appeal
will depend wholly on the form in which the case is proposed to the Tribunal which is
to decide it.

“If ¾ of the States can sustain the State in its decision it would seem that this extra
constitutional course of proceeding might well be spared; inasmuch as can institute
and ¾ can effectuate an amendment of the Constitution, which would establish a
permanent rule of the highest authority, instead of a precedent of construction only.

“If on the other hand ¾ are required to reverse the decision of the State it will then be
in the power of the smallest fraction over ¼ (of 7 States for example out of 24) to give
the law to 17 States, each of the 17 having as parties to the Constitutional compact an

equal right with each of the 7 to expound & insist on its exposition. That the 7 might
in particular cases be right and the 17 wrong, is quite possible. But to establish a
positive & permanent rule giving such a power to such a minority, over such a
majority, would overturn the first principle of a free Government and in practice could
not fail to overturn the Govt. itself.

“It must be recollected that the Constitution was proposed to the people of the States
as a whole, and unanimously adopted as a whole, it being a part of the Constitution
that not less than ¾ should be competent to make any alteration in what had been
unanimously agreed to. So great is the caution on this point, that in two cases where
peculiar interests were at stake a majority even of ¾ are distrusted and a unanimity
required to make any change affecting those cases.

“When the Constitution was adopted as a whole, it is certain that there are many of its
parts which if proposed by themselves would have been promptly rejected. It is far
from impossible that every part of a whole would be rejected by a majority and yet the
whole be unanimously accepted. Constitutions will rarely, probably never be formed
without mutual concessions, without articles conditioned on & balancing each other.
Is there a Constitution of a single State out of the 24 that would bear the experiment
of having its component parts submitted to the people separately, and decided on
according to their insulated merits.

“What the fate of the Constitution of the U. S. would be if a few States could expunge
parts of it most valued by the great majority, and without which the great majority
would never have agreed to it, can have but one answer.

“The difficulty is not removed by limiting the process to cases of construction. How
many cases of that sort involving vital texts of the Constitution, have occurred? how
many now exist? How many may hereafter spring up? How many might be plausibly
enacted, if entitled to the privilege of a decision in the mode proposed.

“Is it certain that the principle of that mode may not reach much farther than is
contemplated? If a single State can of right require ¾ of its Co-States to overrule its
exposition of the Constitution, because that proportion is authorized to amend it, is the
plea less plausible that as the Constitution was unanimously formed it ought to be
unanimously expounded.

“The reply to all such suggestions must be that the Constitution is a compact; that its
text is to be expounded according to the provision for it making part of that Compact;
and that none of the parties can rightfully violate the expounding provision, more than
any other part. When such a right accrues as may be the case, it must grow out of
abuses of the Constitution amounting to a release of the sufferers from their allegiance
to it.

“Will you permit me Sir to refer you to Nos. 39 & 44 of the Federalist Edited at
Washington by Gideon, which will shew the views taken on some points of the
Constitution at the period of its adoption. I refer to that Edition because none
preceding it are without errors in the names prefixed to the several papers as happens

to be the case in No. 51 for which you suppose Col: Hamilton to be responsible. The
errors were occasioned by a memorandum of his penned probably in haste, & partly
in a lumping way. It need not be remarked that they were pure inadvertences.

“I fear Sir I have written you a letter the length of which may accord as little with
your patience, as I am sorry to foresee that the scope of parts of it must do with your
judgment. But a naked opinion did not appear respectful either to the subject or to the
request with which you honored me, and notwithstanding the latitude given to my
pen, I am not unaware that the views it presents may need more of development in
some instances, if not more exactness of discrimination in others, than I could bestow
on them. The subject has been so expanded and recd. such ramifications &
refinements, that a full survey of it is a task agst which my age alone might justly
warn me.

“The delay Sir in making the acknowledgments I owe you was occasioned for a time
by a crowd of objects which awaited my return from a long absence at Richmond, and
latterly by an indisposition from which I am not yet entirely recovered. I hope you
will be good eno’ to accept these apologies, and with them assurances of my high
esteem & my cordial salutations, in which Mrs. M. begs to be united with me, as I do
with her in a respectful tender of them to Mrs. Hayne.”—Chic. Hist. Soc. MSS.

August 20, 1830, Madison wrote to Everett:

“There is not I am persuaded the slightest ground for supposing that Mr. Jefferson
departed from his purpose not to furnish Kentucky with a set of Resolutions for the
year ’99. It is certain that he penned the Resolutions of ’98, and, probably in the terms
in which they passed. It was in those of ’99 that the word ‘nullification’ appears.

“Finding among my pamphlets a copy of the debates in the Virginia House of
Delegates on the Resolutions of ’98, and one of an address of the two Houses to their
constituents on the occasion, I enclose them for your perusal; and I add another,
though it is less likely to be new to you, the ‘Report of a Committee of the S. Carolina
House of Representatives, Decr. 9, 1828,’ in which the nullifying doctrine is stated in
the precise form in which it is now asserted. There was a protest by the minority in the
Virginia Legislature of ’98 against the Resolutions, but I have no copy. The matter of
it may be inferred from the speeches in the Debates. I was not a member in that year,
though the penman of the Resolutions, as now supposed.”—Mad. MSS.

Again on September 10, 1830, he wrote to Everett:

“Since my letter in which I expressed a belief that there was no ground for supposing
that the Kentucky Resolutions of 1799, in which the term ‘nullification’ appears, were
drawn by Mr. Jefferson, I infer from a manuscript paper containing the term just
noticed, that altho he probably had no agency in the draft, nor even any knowledge of
it at the time, yet that the term was borrowed from that source. It may not be safe,
therefore, to rely on his to Mr. W. C. Nicholas printed in his Memoir &
Correspondence, as a proof that he had no connection with or responsibility for the
use of such term on such an occasion. Still I believe that he did not attach to it the idea

of a constitutional right in the sense of S. Carolina, but that of a natural one in cases
justly appealing to it.”—Mad. MSS.

On September 23, 1830, he wrote to Nicholas P. Trist:

“In a letter, lately noticed, from Mr Jefferson, dated November 17, 1799, he ‘incloses
me a copy of the draught of the Kentucky Resolves’, (a press copy of his own
manuscript). Not a word of explanation is mentioned. It was probably sent, and
possibly at my request, in consequence of my being a member elect of the Virga
Legislature of 1799, which would have to vindicate its contemporary Resolns. of -98.
It is remarkable that the paper differs both from the Kentucky Resolutions of -98, &
from those of -99. It agrees with the former in the main and must have been the
pattern of the Resolns. of that year, but contains passages omitted in them, which
employ the terms nullification & nullifying; and it differs in the quantity of matter
from the Resolutions of -99, but agrees with them in a passage which employs that
language, and would seem to have been the origin of it. I conjecture that the
correspondent in Kentucky, Col. George Nicholas, probably might think it better to
leave out particular parts of the draught than risk a misconstruction or misapplication
of them; and that the paper might, notwithstanding, be within the reach & use of the
Legislature of -99, & furnish the phraseology containing the term ‘nullification.’
Whether Mr. Jefferson had noted the difference between his draught & the Resolns of
-98 (he could not have seen those of -99, which passed Novr. 14,) does not appear.
His files, particularly his correspondence with Kentucky, must throw light on the
whole subject. This aspect of the case seems to favor a recall of the communication if
practicable. Though it be true that Mr Jefferson did not draught the Resolutions of
-99, yet a denial of it, simply, might imply more than wd. be consistent with a
knowledge of what is here stated.”—Mad. MSS.

See Warfield’s Kentucky Resolutions of 1798; also, for Jefferson’s correspondence,
his Writings (P. L. Ford, Federal Edition) viii., 57, et seq.

[1 ]Copy of the original among the family papers of the late J. Henley Smith, Esq., of
Washington. On the same subject Madison wrote to Henry St. George Tuckner, April
30, 1830, giving the same information and adding:

“Mr. Jefferson’s letters to me amount to hundreds. But they have not been looked into
for a longtime, with the exception of a few of latter dates. As he kept copies of all his
letters throughout the period, the originals of chose to me exist of course elsewhere.

“My eye fell on the inclosed paper. It is already in obscurity, and may soon be in
oblivion. The Ceracchi named was an artist celebrated for his genius, & was thought a
rival in embryo to Canova & doomed to the guillotine as the author or patron, guilty
or suspected, of the infernal machine for destroying Bonaparte. I knew him, well,
having been a lodger in the same house with him, and much teased by his eager hopes
on wch I constantly threw cold water, of obtaining the aid of Congress for his grand
project. Having failed in this chance, he was advised by me & others to make the
experiment of subscriptions, with the most auspicious names heading the list, and
considering the general influence of Washington and the particular influence of

Hamilton on the corps of speculators then suddenly enriched by the funding system,
the prospect was encouraging. But just as the circular address was about to be
despatched, it was put into his head that the scheme, was merely to get rid of his
importunities, and being of the genus irritabile, suddenly went off in anger and
disgust, leaving behind him heavy drafts on Genl. W. Mr. Jefferson &c. &c. for the
busts &c. he had presented to them. His drafts were not the effect of avarice, but of
his wants, all his resources having been exhausted in the tedious pursuit of his object.
He was an enthusiastic worshipper of Liberty and Fame, and his whole soul was bent
on securing the latter by rearing a monument to the Former, which he considered as
personified in the American Republic. Attempts were made to engage him for a statue
of Genl. W. but he wd. not stoop to that.”—Mad. Mss. The enclosure was Ceracchi’s
circular concerning his proposed monument. A photograph of his bust of Madison is
the frontispiece of this edition of his writings.

[1 ]See the bill in Jefferson’s Writings (P. L. Ford, Federal Edition) ii., 414.

[1 ]The draft may be seen ante, Vol. VI., p. 113, n.

[2 ]Delaplaine’s Repository of the Lives and Portraits of Distinguished Americans.
Philadelphia, 1818.

[1 ]“At the epoch of 1798-9, I had just attained my majority, and although I was too
young to share in the public councils of my country, I was acquainted with many of
the actors of that memorable period; I knew their views, and formed and freely
expressed my own opinions on passing events.” He insisted that the Kentucky and
Virginia resolutions contemplated action to correct the evil of federal usurpation by
the States collectively, following the same line of reasoning as that of
Madison.—Works (Federal Edition), vii., 401.

[1 ]Ante p. 370.

[2 ]In a letter of the same date enclosing the letter, Madison said:

“I have omitted a vindication of the true punctuation of the clause, because I now take
for certain that the original Document signed by the members of the Convention, is in
the Department of State, and that it testifies for itself against the erroneous editions of
the text in that particular. Should it appear that the Document is not there, or that the
error had slipped into it, the materials in my hands to which you refer, will amount I
think to a proof outweighing even that authority. It would seem a little strange, if the
original Constitution be in the Department of State, that it has hitherto escaped notice.
But it is to be explained I presume by the fact that it was not among the papers
relating to the Constn. left with Genl. Washington, and there deposited by him; but,
having been sent from the Convention to the old Congress, lay among the mass of
papers handed over on the expiration of the latter to that Dept. On your arrival at
Washington, you will be able personally, or by a friend having more leisure, to satisfy
yourself on these points. It appears as you foretold that my letter in the Northn.
Review has encountered newspaper criticism; but as yet little if at all I believe on the
ground looked for. In some instances, both the letter & the report of 1799 are

misunderstood, and in none that I have seen has the distinction been properly kept in
view between the authority of a higher Tribunal to decide on the extent of its own
jurisdiction, compared with that of other Tribunals, and its claim of jurisdiction in any
particular case or description of cases as within that extent; it being presumed that if
not within the extent of its jurisdiction it will be pronounced coram non judice; and it
being understood that if not so, it will be a case of usurpation & to be treated as
such.”—Mad. MSS.

(For the punctuation of the Constitution see ante, Vol. IV., p. 489).

He wrote a memorandum to accompany his letter to Stevenson:

“Memorandum not used in letter to Mr. Stevenson.

“These observations will be concluded with a notice of the argt. in favor of the grant
of a full power to provide for Common D. & Genl. w. drawn from the punctuation in
some Editions of the Constn.

“According to one mode of presenting the text: it reads as follows: Congress shall
have power To lay & collect taxes duties- imposts & excises, to pay the debts &
provide for the C.D. & G.W. of the U.S. but all duties imposts & excises shall be
uniform, to another mode the same with commas—vice semicolons.

“According to the other mode the text stands thus. Congress shall have power,

 To lay & col. tax, ds imp. & excises;
 To pay the debts & provide for the Com. d. & G.W.
 of the U. S.; but all ds imp. & excs. shall be
 uniform throug the U. S.

and from this view of the text, it is inferred that the latter sentence conveys a distinct
substantive power to provide for the C.D. & G.W.

“Without enquiring how far the text in this form wd convey the power in question; or
admitting that any mode of pointing or distributing the terms could invalidate the
evidence wch has been exhibited, that it was not the intention of the Genl. or of the St.
Convns. to express by the use of the terms C.D. & G.W. a substantive & indefinite
power; or to imply that the Gen. terms were not to be explained and limited by the
specified powers, succeeding them; in like manner as they were explained & limited
in the former Articles of Confedn. from which the terms were taken, it happens that
the authenticity of the punctuation which preserves the Unity of the clause can be as
satisfactorily shewn, as the true intention of the parties to the Constn. has been shewn
in the language used by them.

“The only instance of a division of the Clause afforded by the Journal of the
Convention is in the Draft of a Constn reported by a Come. of five members, &
entered on the 12. of Sepr.

“But that this must have been an erratum of the pen or of the press, may be inferred
from the circumstance that in a copy of that Report printed at the time for the use of
the members & now in my possession the text is so pointed as to unite the parts in one
substantive clause—an inference favored also by a previous Report of Sept. 4 by a
Come. of eleven in which the parts of the clause are united not separated.

“And that the true reading of the Constn. as it passed, is that which unites the parts, is
abundantly attested by the following facts.

“1. Such is the form of text in the Constn printed at the close of the Convention, after
being signed by the members, of which a copy is also now in my possession.

“2. The case is the same in the Constn reported from the Convention to the old
Congress as printed on their Journal of Sepr 28, 1787, and transmitted by that Body to
the Legislatures of the several States.

“3. The case is the same in the copies of the transmitted Constn as printed by the
ratifying States, several of which have been examined and it is a presumption that
there is no variation in the others. The text is in the same form in an Edn of the Const.
published in 1814 by order of the Senate, as also in the Constn as prefixed to the Edn.
of the Laws of the U. S.

“Should it be not contested that the origl. Const in its engrossed or enrolled state with
the names of the subscribing members suffixed thereto, presents the text in the same
form, that alone must extinguish the argt in question.

“If contrary to every ground of confidence the text in its original enrolled Document,
should not coincide with these multiplied examples, the first question wd be of
comparative probability of error even in the enrolled doct. and in the no & variety of
the concerning examples in opposition to it.

“And a 2d. question, whether the construction put on the text in any of its forms or
punctuations ought to have the weight of a feather agst the solid & diversified proofs
which have been pointed out of the meaning of the parties to the Constn.

“It might be added, that in the Journal of Septr. 14 the clause to which the proviso was
added now a part of the Constn viz—‘but all duties, imposts & excises shall be
uniform throughout the U.S.,’ is called the ‘first’ of course a ‘single’ clause, and it is
obvious that the uniformity required by the proviso implies that what is referred to
was a part of the same clause with the proviso not an antecedent clause altogether
separated from it.”—Mad. Mss.

[1 ]See ante, Vol. IV., p. 253 et seq.

[1 ]Wilson’s pamphlet may be found in his Works (Philadelphia, 1804), iii., 397.

[1 ]A final paragraph for the letter of Novr 27, 1830 to Mr. Stevenson.

“Allow me dear Sir to express on this occasion, what I always feel, an anxious hope
that as our Constitution rests on a middle ground between a form, wholly national,
and one merely federal, and on a division of the powers of Govt between the States in
their united character and in their individual characters, this peculiarity of the system
will be kept in view as a key to the sound interpretation of the Instrument and a
warning agst. any doctrine that would either enable the States to invalidate the powers
of the U. States, or confer all power on them.”—Madison’s Note.

The following is not in the Madison MSS., but is from the Works of Madison (Cong
Ed.):

Supplement to the letter of November 27, 1830, to A. Stevenson, on the phrase
“common defence and general welfare.”—On the power of indefinite appropriation of
money by Congress.

It is not to be forgotten, that a distinction has been introduced between a power
merely to appropriate money to the common defence & general welfare, and a power
to employ all the means of giving full effect to objects embraced by the terms.

1. The first observation to be here made is, that an express power to appropriate
money authorized to be raised, to objects authorized to be provided for, could not, as
seems to have been supposed, be at all necessary; and that the insertion of the power
“to pay the debts,” &c., is not to be referred to that cause. Ithas been seen, that the
particular expression of the power originated in a cautious regard to debts of the
United States antecedent to the radical change in the Federal Government; and that,
but for that consideration, no particular expression of an appropriating power would
probably have been thought of. An express power to raise money, and an express
power (for example) to raise an army, would surely imply a power to use the money
for that purpose. And if a doubt could possibly arise as to the implication, it would be
completely removed by the express power to pass all laws necessary and proper in
such cases.

2. But admitting the distinction as alleged, the appropriating power to all objects of
“common defence and general welfare” is itself of sufficient magnitude to render the
preceding views of the subject applicable to it. Is it credible that such a power would
have been unnoticed and unopposed in the Federal Convention? in the State
Conventions, which contended for, and proposed restrictive and explanatory
amendments? and in the Congress of 1789, which recommended so many of these
amendments? A power to impose unlimited taxes for unlimited purposes could never
have escaped the sagacity and jealousy which were awakened to the many inferior
and minute powers which were criticised and combated in those public bodies.

3. A power to appropriate money, without a power to apply it in execution of the
object of appropriation, could have no effect but to lock it up from public use
altogether; and if the appropriating power carries with it the power of application and
execution, the distinction vanishes. The power, therefore, means nothing, or what is
worse than nothing, or it is the same thing with the sweeping power “to provide for
the common defence and general welfare.”

4. To avoid this dilemma, the consent of the States is introduced as justifying the
exercise of the power in the full extent within their respective limits. But it would be a
new doctrine, that an extra-constitutional consent of the parties to a Constitution could
amplify the jurisdiction of the constituted Government. And if this could not be done
by the concurring consents of all the States, what is to be said of the doctrine that the
consent of an individual State could authorize the application of money belonging to
all the States to its individual purposes? Whatever be the presumption that the
Government of the whole would not abuse such an authority by a partiality in
expending the public treasure, it is not the less necessary to prove the existence of the
power. The Constitution is a limited one, possessing no power not actually given, and
carrying on the face of it a distrust of power beyond the distrust indicated by the
ordinary forms of free Government.

The peculiar structure of the Government, which combines an equal representation of
unequal numbers in one branch of the Legislature, with an equal representation of
equal numbers in the other, and the peculiarity which invests the Government with
selected powers only, not intrusting it even with every power withdrawn from the
local governments, prove not only an apprehension of abuse from ambition or
corruption in those administering the Government, but of oppression or injustice from
the separate interests or views of the constituent bodies themselves, taking effect
through the administration of the Government. These peculiarities were thought to be
safeguards due to minorities having peculiar interests or institutions at stake, against
majorities who might be tempted by interest or other motives to invade them, and all
such minorities, however composed, act with consistency in opposing a latitude of
construction, particularly that which has been applied to the terms “common defence
and general welfare,” which would impair the security intended for minor parties.
Whether the distrustful precaution interwoven in the Constitution was or was not in
every instance necessary; or how far, with certain modifications, any farther powers
might be safely and usefully granted, are questions which were open for those who
framed the great Federal Charter, and are still open to those who aim at improving it.
But while it remains as it is, its true import ought to be faithfully observed; and those
who have most to fear from constructive innovations ought to be most vigilant in
making head against them.

But it would seem that a resort to the consent of the State Legislatures, as a sanction
to the appropriating power, is so far from being admissible in this case, that it is
precluded by the fact that the Constitution has expressly provided for the cases where
that consent was to sanction and extend the power of the national Legislature. How
can it be imagined that the Constitution, when pointing out the cases where such an
effect was to be produced, should have deemed it necessary to be positive and precise
with respect to such minute spots as forts, &c., and have left the general effect
ascribed to such consent to an argumentative, or, rather, to an arbitrary construction?
And here again an appeal may be made to the incredibility that such a mode of
enlarging the sphere of federal legislation should have been unnoticed in the ordeals
through which the Constitution passed, by those who were alarmed at many of its
powers bearing no comparison with that source of power in point of importance.

5. Put the case that money is appropriated to a canal2 to be cut within a particular
State; how and by whom, it may be asked, is the money to be applied and the work to
be executed? By agents under the authority of the General Government? then the
power is no longer a mere appropriating power. By agents under the authority of the
States? then the State becomes either a branch or a functionary of the Executive
authority of the United States, an incongruity that speaks for itself.

6. The distinction between a pecuniary power only, and a plenary power “to provide
for the common defence and general welfare,” is frustrated by another reply to which
it is liable. For if the clause be not a mere introduction to the enumerated powers, and
restricted to them, the power to provide for the common defence and general welfare
stands as a distinct substantive power, the first on the list of legislative powers, and
not only involving all the powers incident to its execution, but coming within the
purview of the clause concluding the list, which expressly declares that Congress may
make all laws necessary and proper to carry into execution the foregoing powers
vested in Congress.

The result of this investigation is, that the terms “common defence and general
welfare” owed their induction into the text of the Constitution to their connexion in
the “Articles of Confederation,” from which they were copied, with the debts
contracted by the old Congress, and to be provided for by the new Congress; and are
used in the one instrument as in the other, as general terms, limited and explained by
the particular clauses subjoined to the clause containing them; that in this light they
were viewed throughout the recorded proceedings of the Convention which framed
the Constitution; that the same was the light in which they were viewed by the State
Conventions which ratified the Constitution, as is shown by the records of their
proceedings; and that such was the case also in the first Congress under the
Constitution, according to the evidence of their journals, when digesting the
amendments afterward made to the Constitution. It equally appears that the alleged
power to appropriate money to the “common defence and general welfare” is either a
dead letter, or swells into an unlimited power to provide for unlimited purposes, by all
the means necessary and proper for those purposes. And it results finally, that if the
Constitution does not give to Congress the unqualified power to provide for the
common defence and general welfare, the defect cannot be supplied by the consent of
the States, unless given in the form prescribed by the Constitution itself for its own
amendment.

As the people of the United States enjoy the great merit of having established a
system of Government on the basis of human rights, and of giving to it a form without
example, which, as they believe, unites the greatest national strength with the best
security for public order and individual liberty, they owe to themselves, to their
posterity, and to the world, a preservation of the system in its purity, its symmetry,
and its authenticity. This can only be done by a steady attention and sacred regard to
the chartered boundaries between the portion of power vested in the Government over
the whole, and the portion undivested from the several Governments over the parts
composing the whole; and by a like attention and regard to the boundaries between
the several departments, Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary, into which the
aggregate power is divided. Without a steady eye to the landmarks between these

departments, the danger is always to be apprehended, either of mutual encroachments,
and alternate ascendencies incompatible with the tranquil enjoyment of private rights,
or of a concentration of all the departments of power into a single one, universally
acknowledged to be fatal to public liberty.

And without an equal watchfulness over the great landmarks between the General
Government and the particular Governments, the danger is certainly not less, of either
a gradual relaxation of the band which holds the latter together, leading to an entire
separation, or of a gradual assumption of their powers by the former, leading to a
consolidation of all the Governments into a single one.

The two vital characteristics of the political system of the United States are, first, that
the Government holds its powers by a charter granted to it by the people; second, that
the powers of Government are formed into two grand divisions—one vested in a
Government over the whole community, the other in a number of independent
Governments over its components parts. Hitherto charters have been written grants of
privileges by Governments to the people. Here they are written grants of power by the
people to their Governments

Hitherto, again, all the powers of Government have been, in effect, consolidated into
one Government, tending to faction and a foreign yoke among a people within narrow
limits, and to arbitrary rule among a people spread over an extensive region. Here the
established system aspires to such a division and organization of power as will
provide at once for its harmonious exercise on the true principles of liberty over the
parts and over the whole, notwithstanding the great extent of the whole; the system
forming an innovation and an epoch in the science of Government no less honorable
to the people to whom it owed its birth, than auspicious to the political welfare of all
others who may imitate or adopt it.

As the most arduous and delicate task in this great work lay in the untried
demarkation of the line which divides the general and the particular Governments by
an enumeration and definition of the powers of the former, more especially the
legislative powers; and as the success of this new scheme of polity essentially
depends on the faithful observance of this partition of powers, the friends of the
scheme, or rather the friends of liberty and of man, cannot be too often earnestly
exhorted to be watchful in marking and controlling encroachments by either of the
Governments on the domain of the other.