Notes on Ancient and Modern Confederacies
James Madison, 1786

Lycian Confederacy

In this confederacy the number of votes allotted to each member was proportioned to its pecuniary contributions. The Judges and Town magistrates were elected by the general authority in like proportion.

The name of a federal republic may be refused to Lycia which Montesquieu cites as an example in which the importance of the members determined the proportion of their votes in the general Councils. The Gryson League is a juster example.

The Lycians had twenty-three cities divided into three classes according to their power. Each city managed its own domestic affairs; nevertheless, they constituted one joint republic and had one council, in which they deliberated and decided on all the important affairs of Lycia. In this assembly a city of the first rank had the right to cast three votes; those of the second rank, two; of the third, one. In the same proportion they also made contributions and performed other duties. This was reasonable and equitable, for those who possess more should contribute more to the common use; so also those same persons should have more influence than the others in deciding the common interest, particularly since it is of more interest to them than to the poor that the republic be preserved.

Instead of a fixed meeting place they chose the city most convenient, according to the circumstances. Once convened they appointed a Lychiarch chief of the whole republic, then the other magistrates; finally they established courts of justice. All these things were done in the same proportion, so that no city was entirely excluded from participating in these functions and honors. This state of things continued until the Romans, having taken control over a great part of Asia, brought it also under their dominion.

Amphyctionic Confederacy

Instituted by Amphyction son of Deucalion King of Athens 1522 years before Christ.

Seated first at Thermopylae, then at Delphos, afterwards at these places alternately. It met half yearly to wit in the Spring & Fall, besides extraordinary occasions. In the latter meetings, all such of the Greeks as happened to be at Delphos on a religious errand were admitted to deliberate, but not to vote.

The number and names of the confederated Cities differently reported. The Union seems to have consisted originally of the Delphians and their neighbours only, and by degrees to have comprehended all Greece. Ten, eleven, twelve are the different numbers of original members mentioned by different Authors.

Each City sent two deputies one to attend particularly to Religious matters -- the other to civil and criminal matters affecting individuals -- both to decide on matters of a general nature. Sometimes more than two were sent, but they had two votes only.

The Amphyctions took an oath mutually to defend and protect the United Cities -- to inflict vengeance on those who should sacrilegiously despoil the temple of Delphos -- to punish the violators of this oath -- and never to divert the water courses of any of the Amphyctionic Cities either in peace or in war.

The Amphyctionic Council was instituted by way of defence and terror against the Barbarians.

Federal Authority

The Amphyctions had full power to propose and resolve whatever they judged useful to Greece.

1. They judged in the last resort all differences between the Amphyctionic Cities.

2. Mulcted the aggressors.

3. Employed whole force of Greece against such as refused to execute its decrees.

4. Guarded the immense Riches of the Temple at Delphos, and decided controversies between the inhabitants and those who came to consult the oracle.

5. Superintended the pythian games.

6. Exercised right of admitting new members.

7. Appointed General of the federal troops with full powers to carry their decrees into execution.

8. Declared & carried on war.

Strabo says that the Council of Amphyctions was dissolved in the time of Augustus: but Pausanias, who lived in the time of Antoninus Pius says it remained entire then, and that the number of Amphyctions was thirty.

The institution declined on the admission of Philip and in the time of the Roman Emperors, the functions of the Council were reduced to the administration & police of the Temple. This limited authority expired only with the Pagan Religion.

Vices of the Constitution

It happened but too often that the Deputies of the strongest Cities awed and corrupted those of the weaker, and that Judgment went in favor of the most powerful party.

Greece was the victim of Philip. If her confederation had been stricter, & been persevered in, she would never have yielded to Macedon, and might have proved a Barrier to the vast projects of Rome. Philip had two votes in the Council.

The Execution of the Amphyctionic powers was very different from the Theory. It did not restrain the parties from warring against each other. Athens & Sparta were members during their conflicts.

Achaean Confederacy

In 124 Olympiad the Patrians & Dymaeans joined first in this league.

This League consisted at first of three small Cities. Aratus added Sicyon, and drew in many other Cities of Achaeia & Peloponnesus. Of these he formed a Republic of a peculiar sort.

It consisted of twelve Cities, and was produced by the necessity of such a defence against the Etolians.

The members enjoyed a perfect equality, each of them sending the same number of deputies to the Senate.

The Senate assembled in the Spring & Fall, and was also convened on extraordinary occasions by two Pretors charged with the administration during the recess, but who could execute nothing without the consent of ten Inspectors.

Federal Authority

1. The Senate composed of the deputies made war & peace.

2. Appointed a Captain General annually.

3. Transferred the power of deciding to ten Citizens taken from the deputies, the rest retaining a right of Consultation only.

4. Sent and received Ambassadors.

5. Appointed a prime Minister.

6. Contracted foreign Alliances.

7. Confederated Cities in a manner forced to receive the same laws & Customs weights & measures; yet considered as having each their independent police & magistrates.

8. This council had complete authority, including the power to make war and negotiate peace, to choose judges, and to send out ambassadors. The presiding officer was the praetor, but other magistrates served in his absence.

Vices of the Constitution

The defect of subjection in the members to the general authority ruined the whole Body. The Romans seduced the members from the League by representing that it violated their sovereignty.

After the death of Alexander, this Union was dissolved by various dissensions raised chiefly through the arts of the Kings of Macedon. Every City was now engaged in a separate interest & no longer acted in concert. After in 124 Olympiad they saw their error & began to think of returning to former State.

Helvetic Confederacy

Commenced in 1308 by the temporary, and in 1315 by the perpetual Union, of Uri, Switz & Underwald, for the defence of their liberties against the invasions of the House of Austria. In 1315 the Confederacy included 8 Cantons; and 1513 the number of 13 was completed by the accession of Appenzell.

The General Diet representing the United Cantons is composed of two deputies from each. Some of their allies as the Abbe St. Gall &c. are allowed by long usage to attend by their deputies.

All general Diets are held at such time & place as Zurich which is first in rank & the depository of the common archives shall name in a circular summons. But the occasion of annual conferences for the administration of their dependent bailages has fixed the same time, to wit the feast of St. John, for the General Diet. And the City of Frawenweld in Turgovia is now the place of Meeting. Formerly it was the City of Baden.

The Diet is opened by a Complimentary Address of the first Deputy of each Canton by turns, called the Helvetic Salutation. It consists in a congratulatory review of circumstances & events favorable to their common interest -- and exhortations to Union and patriotism.

The deputies of the first Canton Zurich propose the matters to be discussed. Questions are decided by plurality of voices. In case of division, the Bailiff of Turgovia has the casting one. The Session of the Diet continues about a Month.

After the objects of universal concern are despatched, such of the deputies whose Constituents have no share in the dependent bailages, withdraw, and the Diet then becomes a representation of the Cantons to whom these bailages belong, and proceeds to the consideration of the business relating thereto.

Extraordinary Diets for incidental business or giving audience to foreign Ministers may be called at any time by any one of the Cantons, or by any foreign Minister who will defray the expense of meeting. Seldom a year without an extraordinary Diet.

There is an annual Diet of 12 Cantons by 1 Deputy from each for the affairs of the Ultramontane bailages.

Particular Cantons also have their diets for their particular affairs, the time & place for whose meeting are settled by their particular Treaties.

All public affairs are now treated not in General Diet but in the particular Assemblies of Protestant & Catholic Cantons.

Federal Authority

The title of Republic and Sovereign State improperly given to this Confederacy, which has no concentered authority the Diets being only a Congress of Delegates from some or all of the Cantons, and having no fixed objects that are national.

The 13 Cantons do not make one Commonwealth like the United Provinces, but are so many independent Commonwealths in strict alliance. There is not so much as any common instrument by which they are all reciprocally bound together; The 3 Primitive Cantons alone being each directly allied to the other twelve. The others in many instances are connected indirectly only, as allies of Allies. In this mode any one Canton may draw in all the others to make a common cause in its defence. By the Convention of Stantz, any member attacked has a direct claim on the succour of the whole Confederacy.

The Confederacy has no common Treasury -- no common troops -- no common Coin -- no common Judicatory nor any other common mark of Sovereignty.

The General Diet cannot terminate any interesting affair without special instructions, & powers, & the deputies accordingly take most matters proposed ad referendum.

The Cantons individually exercise the right of sending & receiving ambassadors -- making Treaties -- coining money -- proscribing the money of one another -- prohibiting the importation and exportation of merchandise -- furnishing troops to foreign States, and doing every thing else which does not wound the liberty of any other Canton. Excepting a few cases specified in the Alliances and which directly concern the Object of the league, no Canton is subject to the Resolutions of the plurality.

The only establishment truly national is that of a federal army, as regulated in 1668, and which is no more than an eventual plan of defence adopted among so many allied States.

1. The League consists in a perpetual defensive engagement against external attacks, and internal troubles. It may be regarded as an Axiom in the Public Law of the Confederacy, that the federal engagements are precedent to all other political engagements of the Cantons.

2. Another axiom is that there are no particular or common possessions of the Cantons, for the defence of which the others are not bound as Guarantees or auxiliaries of Guarantees.

3. All disputes are to be submitted to Neutral Cantons who may employ force if necessary in execution of their decrees. Each party to choose 2 Judges who may in case of disagreement choose umpire, and these under oath of impartiality to pronounce definitive sentence, which all Cantons to enforce.

4. No Canton ought to form new alliances without the consent of the others. This was stipulated in consequence of an improper alliance in 1442 by Zurich with the House of Austria.

5. It is an essential Object of the League to preserve interior tranquility by the reciprocal protection of the form of Government established in each Canton, so that each is armed with the force of the whole Corps for the suppression of rebellions & Revolts, and the History of Switzerland affords frequent instances of mutual succors for these purposes.

6. The Cantons are bound not to give shelter to fugitives from Justice, in consequence of which each Canton can at this day banish malefactors from all the territories of the League.

7. Though each Canton may prohibit the exportation & importation of Merchandise, it must allow it to pass through from one neighboring Canton to another without any augmentation of the tolls.

8. In claiming succours against foreign powers, the 8 Elder Cantons have a more extensive right than the 5 Junior ones. The former may demand them of one another without explaining the motives of the quarrel. The latter cannot intermeddle but as mediators or auxiliaries; nor can they commence hostilities without the sanction of the Confederates: and if cited by their adversaries cannot refuse to accept the other Cantons for Arbiters or Judges.

9. In general each Canton is to pay its own forces without compensation from the whole or the succoured party. But in case a siege is to be formed for the benefit of a particular Canton, this is to defray the expense of it, and if for the common benefit, each is to pay its just proportion. On no pretext is a Canton to be forced to march its troops out of the limits of Switzerland.

10. Foreign Ministers from different Nations reside in different Cantons. Such of them as have letters of Credence for the whole Confederacy address them to Zurich the chief Canton. The Ambassador of France who has most to do with the Confederacy is complimented at his Quarters by deputies from the whole body.

Vices of the Constitution

1. Disparity in size of Cantons

2. Different principles of Government in different Cantons

3. Intolerance in Religion

4. Weakness of the Union. The Common bailages which served as a Cement, sometimes become occasions of quarrels.

In a treaty in 1683, with Victor Amadaeus of Savoy, it is stipulated, that he shall interpose as Mediator in disputes between the Cantons, and if necessary use force against the party refusing to submit to the sentence -- a striking proof of the want of authority in the whole over its parts.

Belgic Confederacy

Established in 1679 by the Treaty called the Union of Utrecht.

The provinces came into this Union slowly. Guelderland the smallest of them made many difficulties. Even some of the Cities & towns pretended to annex conditions to their acceding.

When the Union was originally established a Committee composed of deputies from each province was appointed to regulate affairs, and to convoke the provinces according to article XIX of the Treaty. Out of this Committee grew the States General who strictly speaking are only the Representatives of the States General Who amount to 800 members.

The number of Deputies to the States General from each province not limited, but have only a Single voice. They amount commonly all together to 40 or 50. They hold their seats, some for life -- some for 6, 3 & 1 years, & those of Groningen & Overijssel during pleasure. They are paid, but very moderately, by their respective Constituents, and are amenable to their Tribunals only. No military man is deputable to the States General. Ambassadors of Republic have session & deliberation but no suffrage in States General. The grand Pensioner of Holland as ordinary deputy from Holland, attends always in the States General & makes the propositions of that Province to States General.

They sit constantly at the Hague since 1593, and every day in the week except Saturday & Sunday. The States of Holland in granting this residence, reserve by way of protestation, the rights, the honors & prerogatives belonging to them as Sovereigns of the Province; yielding the States General only a rank in certain public ceremonies.

The eldest deputy from each province presides for a week by turns. The president receives letters &c. from the Ministers of the Republic at foreign Courts, and of foreign Ministers residing at the Hague, as well as of all petitions presented to the Assembly; all which he causes to be read by the Secretary.

The Secretary besides correcting & recording the Resolutions prepares & despatches instructions to Ministers abroad -- & letters to foreign powers. He assists also at conferences held with foreign Ministers & there gives his voice. He has a deputy when there is not a second Secretary. The Agent of the States General is charged with the Archives and is also employed on occasions of receiving foreign Ministers or sending Messages to them.

Federal Authority

The avowed objects of the Treaty of Union. 1. To fortify the Union -- 2 to repel the Common enemy.

The Union is to be perpetual in the same manner as if the Confederates formed one province only, without prejudice however to the privileges & rights of each province & City.

Differences between provinces & between Cities are to be settled by the ordinary Judges -- by arbitration -- by amicable agreement, without the interference of other provinces otherwise than by way of accommodation. The Stadtholder is to decide such differences in the last resort.

No change to be made in the articles of Union, without unanimous consent of the parties & every thing done contrary to them to be null & void.

States General

1. Execute, without consulting their Constituents, treaties & alliances already formed.

2. Take oaths from Generals & Governors and appoint Field Deputies.

3. The collection of duties on imports & exports and the expedition of Safe Conducts are in their name & by their officers.

4. They superintend & examine accounts of the E. India Company.

5. Inspect the Mint -- appoint les Maitres de la monnoye -- fix la taille & la valeur of the Coin, having always regard to the regular rights of the provinces within their own Territories.

6. Appoint a Treasurer General & Receiver General of the Quotas furnished by the Provinces.

7. Elect out of a double nomination, the fiscal & other officers within the departments of the Admiralties, except that the High officers of the fleet are appointed by the Admiral General, to whom the maritime provinces have ceded this right. The Navy supported by duties on foreign trade, appropriated thereto by the maritime provinces, for the benefit of whole Republic.

8. They govern as Sovereigns, the dependent territories, according to the several capitulations.

9. They form Committees of their own body of a Member from each deputation, for foreign affairs -- finances marine -- & other matters. At all these conferences the Grand Pensioner of Holland & the Secretary of the States General attend & have a deciding voice.

10. Appoint & receive Ambassadors -- negotiate with foreign powers -- deliberate on war -- peace -- alliances -- the raising forces -- care of fortifications -- military affairs to a certain degree -- the equipment of fleets -- building of Ships -- direction concerning money. But they can neither make peace -- nor war -- nor truces -- nor treaties -- nor raise troops -- nor impose taxes, nor do other acts requiring unanimity without consulting & obtaining the sanction of the Provinces. Coining money also requires unanimity & express sanction of provinces. Repealing an old law on same footing. In points not enumerated in this article plurality of voices decides.

11. Composition & publication of edicts & proclamations relative both to the objects expressed in the Articles of Union and to the measures taken for the common good, are in the name of the States, and although they are addressed to the States of the Provinces who announce them with their sanction, still it is in the name of the States General that obedience is required of all the inhabitants of the provinces.

Vices of the Constitution

The Union of Utrecht imports an authority in the States General seemingly sufficient to secure harmony; but the Jealousy in each province of its Sovereignty renders the practice very different from the Theory.

It is clear that the delay occasioned by recurring to seven independent provinces including about 52 voting Cities &c. is a vice in the Belgic Republic which exposes it to the most fatal inconveniences. Accordingly the fathers of their Country have endeavored to remedy it in the extraordinary Assemblies of the States General in 1651, 1716, 1717, but unhappily without effect. This vice is notwithstanding deplorable. Among other evils it gives foreign ministers the means of arresting the most important deliberations by gaining a single province or City. This was done by France in 1726, when the Treaty of Hanover was delayed a whole year. In 1688 the States concluded a Treaty of themselves but at the risk of their heads. It is the practice also in matters of contribution or subsidy to pass over this article of the Union, for where delay would be dangerous the consenting provinces furnish their quotas without waiting for the others, but by such means the Union is weakened and if often repeated must be dissolved.

Foreign Ministers elude matters taken ad referendum by tampering with the provinces & Cities.

Treaty of Union obliges each province to levy certain contributions. But this article never could & probably never will be executed because the inland provinces who have little commerce cannot pay an equal Quota.

Deputations from agreeing to disagreeing provinces frequent.

It is certain that so many independent Corps & interests could not be kept together without such a center of Union as the Stadtholdership, as has been allowed & repeated in so many solemn Acts.

In the intermission of the Stadtholdership Holland by her Riches & Authority which drew the others into a sort of dependence, supplied the place.

With such a Government the Union never could have subsisted, if in effect the provinces had not within themselves a spring capable of quickening their tardiness, and impelling them to the same way of thinking. This Spring is the Stadtholder.

Grotius has said that the hatred of his Countrymen against the House of Austria kept them from being destroyed by the vices of their Constitution.

Germanic Confederacy

[Madison's notes on the Germanic Confederacy, including the Diet composition, federal authority, the Aulic Council, Imperial Chamber, rights reserved to and restrictions on members, the Emperor's prerogatives, and constitutional vices, continue at great length. The notes detail the structure of the Holy Roman Empire including its 285 members composing three Colleges, the powers of the Emperor as head of the Germanic body, and the various courts and administrative structures.]

Gryson Confederacy

[Notes end here -- Madison apparently intended to add more]
