OBSERVATIONS ON THE “DRAUGHT OF A
CONSTITUTION FOR VIRGINIA.”1

The term of two years is too short. Six years are not more than     Mad. Mss.
sufficient. A Senate is to withstand the occasional impetuosities   Senate.
of the more numerous branch. The members ought therefore to
derive a firmness from the tenure of their places. It ought to supply the defect of
knowledge and experience incident to the other branch, there ought to be time given
therefore for attaining the qualifications necessary for that purpose. It ought finally to
maintain that system and steadiness in public affairs without which no Government
can prosper or be respectable. This cannot be done by a body undergoing a frequent
change of its members. A Senate for six years will not be dangerous to liberty, on the
contrary it will be one of its best guardians. By correcting the infirmities of popular
Government, it will prevent that disgust agst that form which may otherwise produce a
sudden transition to some very different one. It is no secret to any attentive &
dispassionate observer of ye pol: situation of ye U. S., that the real danger to
republican liberty has lurked in that cause.

The appointment of Senators by districts seems to be objectionable. A spirit of
locality is inseparable from that mode. The evil is fully displayed in the County
representations, the members of which are everywhere observed to lose sight of the
aggregate interests of the Community, and even to sacrifice them to the interests or
prejudices of their respective constituents. In general these local interests are
miscalculated. But it is not impossible for a measure to be accommodated to the
particular interests of every County or district, when considered by itself, and not so,
when considered in relation to each other and to the whole State; in the same manner
as the interests of individuals may be very different in a state of nature and in a
Political union. The most effectual remedy for the local bias is to impress on the
minds of the Senators an attention to the interest of the whole Society, by making
them the choice of the whole Society, each citizen voting for every Senator. The
objection here is that the fittest characters would not be sufficiently known to the
people at large. But in free governments, merit and notoriety of character are rarely
separated, and such a regulation would connect them more and more together. Should
this mode of election be on the whole not approved, that established in Maryland
presents a valuable alternative. The latter affords perhaps a greater security for the
selection of merit. The inconveniences chargeable on it are two: first that the Council
of electors favors cabal. Against this the shortness of its existence is a good antidote,
secondly that in a large State the meeting of the Electors must be expensive if they be
paid, or badly attended if the service is onerous. To this it may be answered that in a
case of such vast importance, the expence, which could not be great, ought to be
disregarded. Whichever of these modes may be preferred, it cannot be amiss so far to
admit the plan of districts as to restrain the choice to persons residing in different
parts of the State. Such a regulation will produce a diffusive confidence in the Body,
which is not less necessary than the other means of rendering it useful. In a State
having large towns which can easily unite their votes the precaution would be
essential to an immediate choice by the people at large. In Maryland no regard is paid
to residence. And what is remarkable vacancies are filled by the Senate itself. This
last is an obnoxious expedient and cannot in any point of view have much effect. It
was probably meant to obviate the trouble of occasional meetings of the Electors. But
the purpose might have been otherwise answered by allowing the unsuccessful
candidates to supply vacancies according to the order of their standing on the list of
votes, or by requiring provisional appointments to be made along with the positive
ones. If an election by districts be unavoidable and the ideas here suggested be sound,
the evil will be diminished in proportion to the extent given to the districts, taking two
or more Senators from each district.

The first question arising here is how far property ought to be Electors.
made a qualification. There is a middle way to be taken which
corresponds at once with the Theory of free Government and the lessons of
experience. A freehold or equivalent of a certain value may be annexed to ye right of
voting for Senators, & ye right left more at large in ye election of the other House.
Examples of this distinction may be found in the Constitutions of several States
particularly if I mistake not, of North Carolina & N. York. This middle mode
reconciles and secures the two cardinal objects of Government; the rights of persons,
and the rights of property. The former will be sufficiently guarded by one branch, the
latter more particularly by the other. Give all power to property, and ye indigent will
be oppressed. Give it to the latter and the effect may be transposed. Give a defensive
share to each and each will be secure. The necessity of thus guarding the rights of
property was for obvious reasons unattended to in the commencement of the
Revolution. In all the Governments which were considered as beacons to republican
Patriots & lawgivers the rights of persons were subjected to those of property. The
poor were sacrificed to the rich. In the existing state of American population &
American property the two classes of rights were so little discriminated that a
provision for the rights of persons was supposed to include of itself those of property,
and it was natural to infer from the tendency of republican laws, that these different
interests would be more and more identified. Experience and investigation have
however produced more correct ideas on this subject. It is now observed that in all
populous countries, the smaller part only can be interested in preserving the rights of
property. It must be foreseen that America, and Kentucky itself will by degrees arrive
at this stage of Society that in some parts of y Union a very great advance is already
made towards it. It is well understood that interest leads to injustice as well where the
opportunity is presented to bodies of men as to individuals; to an interested majority
in a Republic, as to the interested minority in any other form of Government. The
time to guard agst this danger is at the first forming of the Constitution, and in the
present state of population when the bulk of the people have a sufficient interest in
possession or in prospect to be attached to the rights of property, without being
insufficiently attached to the rights of persons. Liberty not less than justice pleads for
the policy here recommended. If all power be suffered to slide into hands not
interested in the rights of property which must be the case whenever a majority fall
under that description, one of two things cannot fail to happen; either they will unite
against the other description and become the dupes & instruments of ambition, or
their poverty & dependence will render them the mercenary instruments of wealth. In
either case liberty will be subverted: in the first by a despotism growing out of
anarchy, in the second, by an oligarchy founded on corruption.

The second question under this head is whether the ballot be not a better mode than
that of voting viva voce. The comparative experience of the States pursuing the
different modes is in favor of the first. It is found less difficult to guard against fraud
in that than against bribery in the other.

Does not The exclusion of Ministers of the Gospel as such      Exclusions.
violate a fundamental principle of liberty by punishing a
religious profession with the privation of a civil right? does it [not] violate another
article of the plan itself which exempts religion from the cognizance of Civil power?
does it not violate justice by at once taking away a right and prohibiting a
compensation for it? does it not in fine violate impartiality by shutting the door agst
the Ministers of one Religion and leaving it open for those of every other.

The re-eligibility of members after accepting offices of profit is so much opposed to
the present way of thinking in America that any discussion of the subject would
probably be a waste of time.

It is at least questionable whether death ought to be confined to   Limits of power.
“Treason and murder.” It would not therefore be prudent to tie
the hands of Government in the manner here proposed. The prohibition of pardon,
however specious in theory would have practical consequences which render it
inadmissible. A single instance is a sufficient proof. The crime of treason is generally
shared by a number, and often a very great number. It would be politically if not
morally wrong to take away the lives of all even if every individual were equally
guilty. What name would be given to a severity which made no distinction between
the legal & the moral offence—between the deluded multitude and their wicked
leaders. A second trial would not avoid the difficulty; because the oaths of the jury
would not permit them to hearken to any voice but the inexorable voice of the law.

The power of the Legislature to appoint any other than their own officers departs too
far from the Theory which requires a separation of the great Depts of Government.
One of the best securities against the creation of unnecessary offices or tyrannical
powers is an exclusion of the authors from all share in filling the one, or influence in
the execution of the other. The proper mode of appointing to offices will fall under
another head.

An election by the Legislature is liable to insuperable objections. Executive Governour.
It not only tends to faction intrigue and corruption, but leaves the
Executive under the influence of an improper obligation to that department. An
election by the people at large, as in this1 & several other States—or by Electors as in
the appointment of the Senate in Maryland, or, indeed, by the people through any
other channel than their legislative representatives, seems to be far preferable. The
ineligibility a second time, though not perhaps without advantages, is also liable to a
variety of strong objections. It takes away one powerful motive to a faithful & useful
administration, the desire of acquiring that title to a reappointment. By rendering a
periodical change of men necessary, it discourages beneficial undertakings which
require perseverance and system, or, as frequently happened in the Roman Consulate,
either precipitates or prevents the execution of them. It may inspire desperate
enterprises for the attainment of what is not attainable by legitimate means. It fetters
the judgment and inclination of the Community; and in critical moments would either
produce a violation of the Constitution or exclude a choice [which] might be essential
to the public safety. Add to the whole, that by putting the Executive Magistrate in the
situation of the tenant of an unrenewable lease, it would tempt him to neglect the
constitutional rights of his department, and to connive at usurpations by the
Legislative department, with which he may connect his future ambition or interest.

The clause restraining the first magistrate from the immediate command of the
military force would be made better by excepting cases in which he should receive the
sanction of the two branches of the Legislature.

The following variations are suggested. 1. The election to be    Council of State.
made by the people immediately, or thro’ some other medium
than the Legislature. 2. A distributive choice should perhaps be secured as in the case
of the Senate. 3. Instead of an ineligibility a second time, a rotation in the federal
Senate, with an abridgmt of the term, to be substituted.

The appointment to offices is, of all the functions of Republican & perhaps every
other form of Government, the most difficult to guard against abuse. Give it to a
numerous body, and you at once destroy all responsibility, and create a perpetual
source of faction and corruption. Give it to the Executive wholly, and it may be made
an engine of improper influence and favoritism. Suppose the power were divided
thus: let the Executive alone make all the subordinate appointments, and the Govr and
Senate, as in the Fedl Constn, those of the superior order. It seems particularly fit that
the Judges, who are to form a distinct department should owe their offices partly to
each of the other departments, rather than wholly to either.

Much detail ought to be avoided in the Constitutional regulation Judiciary.
of this Department, that there may be room for changes which
may be demanded by the progressive changes in the state of our population. It is at
least doubtful whether the number of Courts, the number of Judges, or even ye
boundaries of Jurisdiction ought to be made unalterable but by a revisal of the
Constitution. The precaution seems no otherwise necessary than as it may prevent
sudden modifications of the establishment, or addition of obsequious Judges, for ye
purpose of evading the checks of the Constn & givg effect to some sinister policy of
the Legisre. But might not the same object be otherwise attained? by prohibiting, for
example, any innovations in those particulars without the consent of that department:
or without the annual sanction of two or three successive Assemblies, over & above
the other pre-requisites to the passage of a law.

The model here proposed for a Court of Appeals is not recommended by experience.
It is found as might well be presumed that the members are always warped in their
appellate decisions by an attachment to the principles and jurisdiction of their
respective Courts, & still more so by the previous decision on ye case removed by
appeal. The only efficient cure for the evil is to form a Court of Appeals, of distinct
and select Judges. The expence ought not to be admitted as an objection 1. because
the proper administration of Justice is of too essential a nature to be sacrificed to that
consideration. 2. The number of inferior judges might in that case be lessened. 3. The
whole department may be made to support itself by a judicious tax on law
proceedings.

The excuse for non-attendance would be a more proper subject of enquiry somewhere
else than in the Court to which the party belonged. Delicacy, mutual convenience &c,
would soon reduce the regulation to mere form; or if not, it might become a
disagreeable source of little irritations among ye members. A certificate from the local
Court or some other local authority where the party might reside or happen to be
detained from his duty, expressing the cause of absence as well as that it was judged
to be satisfactory, might be safely substituted. Few Judges would improperly claim
their wages, if such a formality stood in the way. These observations are applicable to
the Council of State.

A Court of Impeachments is among the most puzzling articles of a Republican
Constitution; and it is far more easy to point out defects in any plan than to supply a
cure for them. The diversified expedients adopted in the Constitutions of the several
States prove how much the compilers were embarrassed on this subject. The plan here
proposed varies from all of them, and is perhaps not less than any a proof of the
difficulties which pressed the ingenuity of its author. The remarks arising on it are 1.
That it seems not to square with reason that the right to impeach should be united to
that of trying the impeachment, & consequently in a proportional degree, to that of
sharing in the appointment of, or influence on the Tribunal to which the trial may
belong. 2. As the Executive & Judiciary would form a majority of the Court, and
either have a right to impeach, too much might depend on a combination of these
departments. This objection would be still stronger if the members of the Assembly
were capable as proposed of holding offices, and were amenable in that capacity to
the Court. 3. The H. of Delegates and either of those departments could appt a
majority of ye Court. Here is another danger of combination, and the more to be
apprehended as that branch of ye Legisl wd also have the right to impeach, a right in
their hands of itself sufficiently weighty; and as the power of the Court wd extend to
the head of the Ex, by whose independence the constitl rights of that department are to
be secured agst Legislative usurpations. 4. The dangers in the two last cases would be
still more formidable, as the power extends not only to deprivation, but to future
incapacity of office. In the case of all officers of sufficient importance to be objects of
factious persecution, the latter branch of power is in every view of a delicate nature.
In that of the Chief Magistrate it seems inadmissible, if he be chosen by the
Legislature; and much more so, if immediately by the people themselves. A
temporary incapacitation is ye most that cd be properly authorised.

The 2 great desiderata in a Court of Impeachts are 1. impartiality. 2.
respectability—the first in order to a right, the second in order to a satisfactory
decision. These characteristics are aimed at in the following modification. Let the
Senate be denied the right to impeach. Let ? of the members be struck out, by
alternate nominations of the prosecutors & party impeached; the remaining ? to be the
stamen of the Court. When the H. of Del: impeach let the Judges, or a certain
proportion of them—and the Council of State be associated in the trial, when the Govr
or Council impeaches, let the Judges only be associated; when the Judges impeach let
the Council only be associated. But if the party impeached by the H. of Dels be a
member of the Ex. or Judicy, let that of which he is a member not be associated. If the
party impeached belong to one & be impeached by the other of these branches, let
neither of them be associated the decision being in this case left with the Senate alone;
or if that be thought exceptionable, a few members might be added by ye H. of Ds. ?
of the Court should in all cases be necessary to a conviction, & the Chief Magistrate
at least should be exempt from a sentence of perpetual if not of temporary incapacity.
It is extremely probable that a critical discussion of this outline may discover
objections which do not occur. Some do occur; but appear not to be greater than are
incident to any different modification of the Tribunal.

The establishment of trials by Jury & viva voce testimony in all cases and in all
Courts, is, to say the least, a delicate experiment; and would most probably be either
violated, or be found inconvenient.

A revisionary power is meant as a check to precipitate, to unjust, Council of Revision.
and to unconstitutional laws. These important ends would it is
conceded be more effectually secured, without disarming the Legislature of its
requisite authority, by requiring bills to be separately communicated to the Exec: &
Judicy depts. If either of these object, let ?, if both ¾ of each House be necessary to
overrule the objection; and if either or both protest agst a bill as violating the
Constitution, let it moreover be suspended notwithstanding the overruling proportion
of the Assembly, until there shall have been a subsequent election of the H. of Ds and
a re-passage of the bill by ? or ¾ of both Houses, as the case may be. It sd not be
allowed the Judges or ye. Executive to pronounce a law thus enacted unconstitul &
invalid.

In the State Constitutions & indeed in the Fedl one also, no provision is made for the
case of a disagreement in expounding them; and as the Courts are generally the last in
making ye decision, it results to them by refusing or not refusing to execute a law, to
stamp it with its final character. This makes the Judiciary Dept paramount in fact to
the Legislature, which was never intended and can never be proper.

The extension of the Habs Corps to the cases in which it has been usually suspended,
merits consideration at least. If there be emergencies which call for such a suspension,
it can have no effect to prohibit it, because the prohibition will assuredly give way to
the impulse of the moment; or rather it will have the bad effect of facilitating other
violations that may be less necessary. The Exemption of the press from liability in
every case for true facts is also an innovation and as such ought to be well considered.
This essential branch of liberty is perhaps in more danger of being interrupted by local
tumults, or the silent awe of a predominant party, than by any direct attacks of Power.