Outline
=======
Date: September 1829
Source: Hunt Edition, The Writings of James Madison, Vol. 9, pp. 212-213
Pages in PDF: 212-213
Note: Preparatory notes for the Virginia Constitutional Convention speech (December 2, 1829)

OUTLINE.

Sepr. 1829.        Mad. Mss.

The compound Govt of the U. S. is without a model, and to be explained by itself, not
by similitudes or analogies. The terms Union, Federal, National not to be applied to it
without the qualifications peculiar to the system. The English Govt is in a great
measure sui generis, and the terms Monarchy used by those who look at the executive
head only, and Commonwealth, by those looking at the representative member
chiefly, are inapplicable in a strict sense.

A fundamental error lies in supposing the State Governments to be the parties to the
Constitutional compact from which the Govt. of the U. S. results.

It is a like error that makes the General Govt. and the State governments the parties to
the compact, as stated in the 4th letter of “Algernon Sidney,” [Judge Roane]. They
may be parties in a judicial controversy, but are not so in relation to the original
constitutional compact.

In No. XI of “Retrospects,” [by Govr. Giles], in the Richmond Enquirer of Sept. 8,
1829, Mr. Jefferson is misconstrued, or rather mistated, as making the State Govts &
the Govt of the U. S. foreign to each other; the evident meaning, or rather the express
language of Mr. J, being “the States are foreign to each other, in the portions of
sovereignty not granted, as they were in the entire sovereignty before the grant,” and
not that the State Govts. and the Govt. of the U. S. are foreign to each other. As the
State Govts participate in appointing the Functionaries of the Genl. Govt. it can no
more be said that they are altogether foreign to each other, than that the people of a
State & its Govt. are foreign.

The real parties to the constl. compact of the U. S. are the States—that is, the people
thereof respectively in their sovereign character, and they alone, so declared in the
Resolutions of 98, and so explained in the Report of 99. In these Resolutions as
originally proposed, the word alone, wch. guarded agst. error on this point, was struck
out, [see printed debates of 98] and led to misconceptions & misreasonings
concerning the true character of the pol: system, and to the idea that it was a compact
between the Govts. of the States and the Govt. of the U. S. an idea promoted by the
familiar one applied to Govts. independent of the people, particularly the British, of
[?] a compact between the monarch & his subjects, pledging protection on one side &
allegiance on the other.

The plain fact of the case is that the Constitution of the U. S. was created by the
people composing the respective States, who alone had the right; that they organized
the Govt. into Legis. Ex. & Judicy. departs. delegating thereto certain portions of
power to be exercised over the whole, and reserving the other portions to themselves
respectively. As these distinct portions of power were to be exercised by the General
Govt. & by the State Govts; by each within limited spheres; and as of course


controversies concerning the boundaries of their power wd happen, it was provided
that they should be decided by the Supreme Court of the U. S. so constituted as to be
as impartial as it could be made by the mode of appointment & responsibility for the
Judges.

Is there then no remedy for usurpations in which the Supreme Ct. of the U. S. concur?
Yes: constitutional remedies such as have been found effectual; particularly in the
case of alien & sedition laws, and such as will in all cases be effectual, whilst the
responsibility of the Genl. Govt to its constituents continues:—Remonstrances &
instructions—recurring elections & impeachments; amendt. of Const. as provided by
itself & exemplified in the 11th article limiting the suability of the States.

These are resources of the States agst. the Genl. Govt. resulting from the relations of
the States to that Govt: whilst no corresponding controul exists in the relations of the
Genl to the individual Govts all of whose functionaries are independent of the United
States in their appt and responsibility.

Finally should all the constitutional remedies fail, and the usurpations of the Genl
Govt become so intolerable as absolutely to forbid a longer passive obedience & non-
resistance, a resort to the original rights of the parties becomes justifiable; and redress
may be sought by shaking off the yoke, as of right, might be done by part of an
individual State in a like case; or even by a single citizen, could he effect it, if
deprived of rights absolutely essential to his safety & happiness. In the defect of their
ability to resist, the individual citizen may seek relief in expatriation or voluntary
exile1 a resort not within the reach of large portions of the community.

In all the views that may be taken of questions between the State Govts & the Genl.
Govt. the awful consequences of a final rupture & dissolution of the Union shd. never
for a moment be lost sight of. Such a prospect must be deprecated, must be shuddered
at by every friend to his country, to liberty, to the happiness of man. For, in the event
of a dissolution of the Union, an impossibility of ever renewing it is brought home to
every mind by the difficulties encountered in establishing it. The propensity of all
communities to divide when not pressed into a unity by external danger, is a truth well
understood. There is no instance of a people inhabiting even a small island, if remote
from foreign danger, and sometimes in spite of that pressure, who are not divided into
alien, rival, hostiletribes. The happy Union of these States is a wonder; their Constn. a
miracle; their example the hope of Liberty throughout the world. Woe to the ambition
that would meditate the destruction of either!

[Word count: 1020]
